DOCUMENT: falcon_m7.pdf PAGE: 1/22

Benchmarking and Analysing the NIST PQC
Lattice-Based Signature Schemes Standards on
the ARM Cortex M7
James Howe1 and Bas Westerbaan2⋆
1 SandboxAQ, Palo Alto, USA.
james.howe@sandboxaq.com
2 Cloudflare, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
bas@westerbaan.name
Abstract. This paper presents an analysis of the two lattice-based dig-
ital signature schemes, Dilithium and Falcon, which have been cho-
sen by NIST for standardization, on the ARM Cortex M7 using the
STM32F767ZI NUCLEO-144 development board. This research is mo-
tivated by the ARM Cortex M7 device being the only processor in the
Cortex-M family to offer a double precision (i.e., 64-bit) floating-point
unit, making Falcon’s implementations, requiring 53 bits of double preci-
sion, able to fully run native floating-point operations without any emu-
lation. When benchmarking natively, Falcon shows significant speed-ups
between 6.2–8.3x in clock cycles, 6.2-11.8x in runtime, and Dilithium
does not show much improvement other than those gained by the slightly
faster processor. We then present profiling results of the two schemes on
the ARM Cortex M7 to show their respective bottlenecks and operations
where the improvements are and can be made. This demonstrates, for
example, that some operations in Falcon’s procedures observe speed-ups
by an order of magnitude. Finally, since Falcon’s use of floating points
is so rare in cryptography, we test the native FPU instructions on 4 dif-
ferent STM32 development boards with the ARM Cortex M7 and also a
Raspberry Pi 3 which is used in some of Falcon’s oﬀicial benchmarking
results. We find constant-time irregularities in all of these devices, which
makes Falcon insecure on these devices for applications where signature
generation can be timed by an attacker.
1 Introduction
Since NIST began their Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) Standardization
Project [NIST15] there have been a number of instances where they have called
for benchmarking and evaluations of the candidates on differing hardware plat-
forms [NIST16; AAAS+19; AASA+20]. This prompted research into implement-
ing these schemes on a variety of platforms in software, for example see PQ-
Clean [PQClean], SUPERCOP [SupCop], liboqs [liboqs], and pqm4 [pqm4], and
⋆ The research in this paper was carried out while employed at PQShield.
