DOCUMENT: falcon_m7.pdf PAGE: 3/22

Dilithium and Falcon on the ARM Cortex M7 3
also provide results for Falcon-1024 sign tree, which does not fit on the Cortex
M4.
For Dilithium, we benchmark the code from the pqm4 repository and in the
same manner provide comparative results of Cortex M4 vs M7 performances.
We also provide results for Dilithium’s highest parameter set, which does not fit
on the Cortex M4.
In Section 4, we profile Dilithium and Falcon to find their performance bot-
tlenecks on the ARM Cortex M7, providing averages using 1,000 executions of
each scheme. Specifically for Falcon, we provide what operations and functions
benefit from using the board’s 64-bit FPU the most. Indeed, we compare the
profiling results using the Cortex M7’s FPU against the profiling results on the
same board where floating-point operations are emulated (as it does on the ARM
Cortex M4). For Dilithium, we cannot compare this way (since it does not require
floating points) and so we provide plain profiling results.
The link to code used in this paper has been removed to maintain anonymity.
The code will be made publicly available after publication.
2 Background
Dilithium and Falcon are the two lattice-based signature schemes selected by
NIST as PQC standards, and two of the three overall signatures selected for
standardization.
Dilithium is the primary signature scheme and is based on the Fiat–Shamir
with aborts paradigm, with its hardness relying on the decisional module-LWE
and module-SIS problems. Algorithm 1 in Appendix A shows Dilithium’s key
generation, sign, and verify algorithms. In the third round, Dilithium offered
three parameter sets satisfying the NIST security levels 2, 3, and 5 for being
at least as hard to break as SHA-256, AES-192, and AES-256, respectively.
Dilithium benefits from using the same polynomial ring (Zq [X]/(Xn + 1)) with
a fixed degree (n = 256) and modulus (q = 8380417) and only requires sampling
from the uniform distribution, making its implementation significantly simpler
than for Falcon. Dilithium’s performance profile offers balance for the core oper-
ations (key generation, signing, and verifying) and also key and signature sizes.
Furthermore, Dilithium can be implemented with a relatively small amount of
RAM [GKS20].
Falcon is based on the hash-then-sign paradigm over lattices, with its hard-
ness relying on the NTRU assumption. Algorithm 2 in Appendix B shows Fal-
con’s key generation, sign, and verify algorithms. In the third round, Falcon
offered two parameter sets (for degree n = 512 and 1024) satisfying the NIST
security levels 1 and 5 for being as hard to break as AES-128 and AES-256.
Compared with Dilithium, Falcon is significantly more complex; relying on sam-
pling over non-uniform distributions, with floating-point operations, and using
tree data structures. However, Falcon benefits from having much smaller public
key and signature sizes, while having similar signing and verification times. For
