DOCUMENT: falcon_m7.pdf PAGE: 13/22

Dilithium and Falcon on the ARM Cortex M7 13
5 Constant-Time Validation of Falcon’s Floating-
Point Operations
This section presents the constant runtime analysis of Falcon on the ARM Cortex
M7. Technical manuals for ARM development boards often report cycle counts
for FPU instructions7, however ARM does not appear to make this information
public for the Cortex M7 core.
We are specifically interested in Falcon’s use of double precision floating
points and how it exploits the devices’ 64-bit floating point unit (FPU). This
has not been investigated before since the primary evaluation target used for
post-quantum schemes, the ARM Cortex M4, only has a 32-bit FPU, which is
not suﬀicient for the 53-bit floating-point precision required by Falcon.
The double precision FPU on the ARM Cortex M7 is compliant with the
IEEE-754 standard as thus supports the binary64 type. The IEEE-754 standard
defines all aspects of floating-point numbers (i.e., their sign, exponent, and man-
tissa) so that hardware/software interoperability can be ensured. Thus, most if
not all modern CPUs offer compliance with this standard within their dedicated
FPUs used to speed-up floating-point operations.
We investigate the timings on the device used in the previous sections, the
STM32F767ZI NUCLEO-144 development board, and due to the issues found
we extended this to three other STM32 development boards (the STM32H743ZI,
STM32H723ZG, and STM32F769I-DISCO) in order to see if this issue affected
other development boards. We found the same issues occurred in all four de-
velopment boards. We are aware of a similar experiment being run on the
STM32H7308. We also further investigate timing issues on the Raspberry Pi
3, due to its use in evaluating the constant-time code of Falcon [Por19].
5.1 STM32 Development Boards
The issue discovered with the STM32 development boards was that the FPU
operations were not fully constant time. We did not pursue ways to exploit this
into an attack, but we felt this was worth reporting nonetheless. The code for
testing this constant run-time is available on repository already provided.
For each floating-point instruction (e.g., vmul.f64), we wrote inline assem-
bly of ten consecutive operations, given two random inputs, which we then aver-
aged to find the required clock cycles. We used inline assembly to minimize the
unwanted optimizations from the compiler, and clobbered registers where nec-
essary. Using this approach minimizes the effect of surrounding instructions on
the operations of interest, which for example would occur using C, and ensures
that all execution is from cache. An example of this is shown in Listing 1.1 for
the 64-bit floating point multiplication operation vmul.f64.
7 For example, see the ARM Cortex-M4 Technical Reference Manual https://
developer.arm.com/documentation/ddi0439/b/BEHJADED
8 https://www.quinapalus.com/cm7cycles.html
