DOCUMENT: falcon_m7.pdf PAGE: 18/22

18 James Howe and Bas Westerbaan
The FPU does not have any effect on Falcon’s verification operation, this is
essentially because it does not require floating-point operations and is a relatively
computationally light procedure.
In Section 5, we find constant time issues with Falcon on four different STM32
development boards using the ARM Cortex M7 and the Raspberry Pi 3 using the
ARM Cortex A53. The issues we found on the STM32 development boards were
where the devices’ dedicated floating-point unit was used (which can significantly
speed-up Falcon), specifically the double-precision functions, were all shown to
be non-constant-time. Specifically analysing the double-precision addition, we
discovered the size of the significand influenced the runtime of this function.
We further investigated constant timeness on the Raspberry Pi 3, which uses
the ARM Cortex A53, where we also found timing issues when casting from a
double to an int64_t, and when implemented in LLVM, it is not constant time
and leaks the sign of the value.
We reported these issues and our proposed fix to the Falcon team, but we
did not investigate how to exploit this for a timing attack.
Overall, this research shows that when implementing Falcon the platform
and/or situation it is used in should play a major consideration. At the very
least, the processor should be checked for constant timeness if the FPU is being
used. A recent Cloudflare blog10 took note of our results and is currently only
considering uses for Falcon in an offline manner, as they “feel it’s too early to
deploy Falcon where the timing of signature minting can be measured”.
[AAC+22] References
[AAAS+19] G. Alagic, G. Alagic, J. Alperin-Sheriff, D. Apon, D. Cooper, Q. Dang,
Y.-K. Liu, C. Miller, D. Moody, R. Peralta, et al. Status report on
the first round of the NIST post-quantum cryptography standardization
process. US Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards
and Technology …, 2019 (cited on page 1).
G. Alagic, D. Apon, D. Cooper, Q. Dang, T. Dang, J. Kelsey, J. Lichtinger,
C. Miller, D. Moody, R. Peralta, et al. Status Report on the Third
Round of the NIST Post-Quantum Cryptography Standardization Pro-
cess. Technical report, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Gaithersburg, MD, 2022 (cited on pages 2, 5, 6).
G. Alagic, J. Alperin-Sheriff, D. Apon, D. Cooper, Q. Dang, J. Kelsey,
Y.-K. Liu, C. Miller, D. Moody, R. Peralta, et al. Status Report on the
Second Round of the NIST Post-Quantum Cryptography Standardiza-
tion Process. NIST, Tech. Rep., July, 2020 (cited on pages 1, 2).
ARM. ARM Cortex-M7 Processor: Technical Reference Manual. Re-
vision r1p2, 2018. https : / / developer . arm . com / documentation /
ddi0489/f/programmers- model/instruction- set- summary/binary-
compatibility-with-other-cortex-processors (cited on page 2).
10 https://blog.cloudflare.com/nist-post-quantum-surprise/
[AASA+20] [ARM18] 
