DOCUMENT: ARMv8_falcon.pdf PAGE: 2/15

Y. Kim et al.: Accelerating Falcon on ARMv8
of the 3 Round candidates are lattice-based cryptography.
Polynomial multiplication, the core operation of lattice-based
cryptography, achieves high performance even in embedded
platforms because it is accelerated through various algorithms
such as Fast-Fourier Transform/Number-Theoretic Trans-
form (FFT/NTT) and Toom-Cook. Among Round 3 DSA
schemes, Falcon supports a shorter key length and faster ver-
ification speed compared to other DSA schemes; thus, it has
advantages that it can be seamlessly integrated into currently
used security protocols and applications. For example, recent
studies have been conducted to apply PQC-DSA schemes
to cryptographic protocols. Since the short signature length
and fast verification speed, in WAVE-based V2Verifier, Fal-
con was selected as the most suitable DSA scheme in the
autonomous driving environment [2]. In addition, in TLS 1.3,
Falcon is judged that it is the most suitable DSA scheme
in a server environment that supports floating-point opera-
tions [3].
The Falcon is designed based on the NTRU lattices.
Unlike other crypto systems based on the Learning With
Error/Learning With Rounding (LWE/LWR), Falcon per-
forms polynomial operations in complex number domain
where each coefficient of a polynomial consists of a real and
an image part which are represented in floating-point number
(Fortunately, since ARMv8 MCU supports generic floating-
point arithmetics, we can make use of them to enhance the
performance of floating-point arithmetic in Falcon). In addi-
tion, in key generation and signature verification process,
polynomial operations in integer domain are also required.
In summary, the core operation of Falcon is polynomial
multiplication in both complex number domain and integer
number domain. The reference software of Falcon makes
use of FFT/NTT-based multiplication methods for enhanc-
ing the performance of polynomial multiplication in each of
complex and integer domain, respectively. In particular, key
generation process calls various kinds of FFT/NTT to solve
NTRU equations, which is a key part of Falcon’s performance
load. Therefore, in order to accelerate the performance of
Falcon, the FFT/NTT need to be optimized. Various imple-
mentation studies have been conducted on PQC PKE/KEM
and DSA in the ARM architecture, but it is mainly aimed at
the ARM-Cortex M series [4]–[6]. As far as we know, the
implementation of Falcon in the ARMv8 environment does
not yet exist.
ARMv8 architectures are currently being used as a
core Micro-Controller Unit (MCU) for mobile, tablet, and
autonomous driving. ARMv8 core supports the NEON
engine, a parallel processing module, and the Floating-Point
(FP) instruction set that can efficiently process FP opera-
tions. Thus, in this paper, we present an optimized FFT and
NTT based polynomial multiplications, the core operation
of Falcon, in ARMv8-A environment. We basically apply
data parallelism for processing several coefficients at once
by using NEON engine during FFT/NTT-based polynomial
operations. For example, 2 (resp. 8) coefficient of a poly-
nomial in complex domain (resp. integer domain) can be
simultaneously processed with NEON engine. Furthermore,
regarding FFT multiplication, we optimize FPC functions
(FPC-MUL/DIV/ADD/SUB), which are the lowest-level
operations of FFT multiplication, by utilizing fused FP
instructions and the NEON engine. In addition, the Falcon
has different degrees of polynomials for each security level,
thus the depth of NTT/FFT at each security level is different.
Thus, we apply memory optimization paths taking this into
account to minimize the memory access overheads. Through
the aforementioned optimization technique, the performance
of Falcon has been significantly improved. Our optimized
Falcon software library can be utilized for several applica-
tion where PQC-DSA is required such as V2X (Vehicle to
everying) communications requiring authentication of BSM
(Basic Security Message), TLS, and DNSSEC.
This work’s contributions can be summarized as follows.
• First Work of Software Optimization about Falcon
on ARMv8 Platforms
Until now, the research on software optimization of Fal-
con has been only studied on classical CPU (Intel/AMD)
and 32-bit ARM Cortex-M4. However, in IoT applica-
tion, there are many types of devices used. Currently,
ARMv8-A based devices like mobile phones, tables,
and so on have been are widely used for various IoT
applications and Edge computing applications. Hence,
we concentrate on the software optimization of Falcon,
Post Quantum Digital Signature Algorithm (PQDSA),
on ARMv8-A based devices. As far as we know, this
is the first work on software optimization of Falcon on
ARMv8-A based device. At first, we discuss in depth
optimization methods of FFT/NTT-based polynomial
multiplication, the core operation of Falcon algorithm.
As a result of the proposed methods, our Falcon software
improved its performance by 15.1% (resp. 18.1%) in
KeyGen, 16.5% (17.1%) in Sign, and 65.4% (69.4%)
in Verify when compared to Falcon reference software
on security level 1 (resp. 5).
• Optimizing FFT/NTT-based polynomial multiplica-
tion on ARMv8-A Devices
Polynomial multiplication is one of the most time-
consuming operation in Lattice-based Post Quantum
Cryptosystem. However, Falcon computes polynomial
multiplications on not only integer number domain but
also complex number while other Lattice-based cryp-
tosystems like Crystals-Dilithium and Crystals-Kyber
computing those on only integer number domain. For
accelerating the polynomial multiplication in com-
plex number domain and integer number domain,
FFT-based polynomial multiplication and NTT-based
polynomial multiplication have been widely used,
respectively. However, there are room for optimizing
them on ARMv8 in order to enhance the overall per-
formance of Falcon. For enhancing the FFT-based and
NTT-based polynomial multiplication method, we take
full advantage of NEON engine in ARMv8-A MCU.
We basically data parallelism approach for processing
VOLUME 10, 2022 44447
