DOCUMENT: ARMv8_falcon.pdf PAGE: 3/15

Y. Kim et al.: Accelerating Falcon on ARMv8
Algorithm 1: Key Generation KeyGen(φ,q)
Require: A monic polynomial φ∈Z[x], a modulus q
Ensure : A secret key sk, a public key pk
1 f,g,F ,G,γ ←NTRUGen(φ,q) 2 B ← g−f
G−F
3ˆ
B ←FFT(B) ˆ
ˆ
4 G ←
B ×
B∗
5 T ←ffLDL∗(G) 6 for each leaf leaf of T do 7 leaf.value ←σ/√leaf.value
8 sk ←(ˆ
B,T)
9 h ←gf−1 mod q
10 pk ←h
11 return sk,pk
◃ Solving the NTRU equation
◃ Compute the FFT for each of the 4 components {g,−f,G,−F }
◃ Computing the LDL∗tree
◃ Normalization step
2 coefficients (in case of FFT-based polynomial multi-
plication) and 8 coefficients (in case of NTT-based poly-
nomial multiplication). Furthermore, we make the most
of fused multiplication instructions in order to reduce the
number of redundant addition and subtraction instruc-
tions. The number of memory accesses during poly-
nomial multiplication could be reduced by extending
the previous merging technique. Through the proposed
several implementation techniques, the performance of
FFT-based polynomial multiplication could be improved
as 210% (resp. 188%) on security level 1 (resp. 5). The
performance of NTT-based polynomial multiplication
could be also improved as 250% (resp. 228%) on secu-
rity level 1 (resp. 5).
• Presenting Optimized Software of Falcon on All
Security Parameters
NIST defines the security level of Post Quantum Cryp-
tosystems from 1 to 5 and Falcon provides parame-
ters about security level 1 and 5. Thus, we optimize
the performance of Falcon regarding security 1 and
5 parameters. Because the polynomial degrees change
as the parameters change, it is necessary to care-
fully optimize the performance of FFT-based and
NTT-based polynomial multiplication. As a result,
we have optimized the performance of Falcon by prop-
erly optimizing them for parameters and presented
the comprehensive performance analysis on all Falcon
parameters.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows
Section II introduces the Falcon signature scheme and perfor-
mance profiling of the reference code, as well as a descrip-
tion of the ARMv8 microcontroller. Section III discusses
and analyzes existing implementation research for PQC in
an embedded environment. Section IV presents our opti-
mized FFT/NTT-based multiplication implementation for the
ARMv8 platform. Section V compares the performance of
FFT/NTT-based multiplications and the overall performance
of Falcon in ARMv8 platforms to the reference implementa-
tion. Finally, in section VI, we conclude this paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. FALCON
Falcon has a significantly smaller key and signature size
than other PQC-DSA competitors. Falcon is designed based
on NTRU lattice, so it satisfies compact DSA by using
FFT/NTT, which is the core operation of Falcon. The whole
process of Falcon is quite complex, but we do our best to
explain Falcon DSA. In this article, we express Falcon’s
whole algorithm based on PQC-specification.
KeyGen process of Falcon consists of two distinct parts.
Algorithm 1 shows the overview of the KeyGen process.
First, it generates F and G that satisfy the NTRU equation
through the NTRUGen algorithm. f and g are chosen in
Gaussian-distribution and check if f−1 exists. Then compute
h= gf−1mod (q,xn +1). Finally, NTRUGen generates
F and G that satisfy fG−gF= q mod φ. This process
moves to the upper field after performing calculations in
the lower field using the field norm map. NTRUGen is
efficiently computed using FFT/NTT. In addition, since addi-
tional operations on one polynomial are used in another, one
FFT/NTT representation can be used repeatedly. Therefore,
compared to Crystals-Dilithium, which is the same lattice-
based PQC-DSA, FFT/NTT are called quite a lot during
the KeyGen process. Therefore, Falcon’s KeyGen causes a
lot of performance load compared to other PQC-DSAs. The
remaining process of KeyGen is generating a Falcon Tree for
trapdoor sampler operation. In this process, KeyGen process
performs an LDL∗ decomposition on theˆ
ˆ
B ×
B∗ matrix.
Finally, it returns the private key sk=(ˆ
B,T) and the public
key sk=h=gf−1mod (q,xn +1).
In Sign process, as shown in Algorithm 2, the signer
computes a hash value c ∈Zq[x]/<xn +1 >. for message
m and random seed r. It calculates the short values s1 and
s2 satisfying s1 +s2h ≡c mod q using the private keys f, g,
44448 VOLUME 10, 2022
