DOCUMENT: ARMv8_falcon.pdf PAGE: 5/15

Y. Kim et al.: Accelerating Falcon on ARMv8
FIGURE 1. Butterfly diagrams for the cooley-tukey and gentleman-sande for FFT/NTT algorithms [7], [8].
FFT/NTT for low dimension is calculated in NTRU equation
and ffSampling, etc., a considerable number of FFT/NTT are
actually called in Falcon. In the case of Falcon, depending on
the security level, each polynomial has a depth of 9 to 10 and
can be divided until a single rational/integer coefficient. Sev-
eral methods have been proposed to perform the FFT/NTT.
Falcon uses a butterfly technique based on Cooley-Tukey [7]
and Gentlemen-Sande [8] because it uses a bit-reversal repre-
sentation at low dimension. Butterfly method is used to match
the two transformation methods, and since both algorithms
are bit-reverse-based, there is no need to invert additional bits.
Figure 1 shows a diagram of the Cooley-Tukey and
Gentleman-Sande algorithms. Since both algorithms are
based on bit-reversal, when multiplying n-th of unity, the data
tree containing the bit-reversal must be multiplied together
(ξ=n-th of unity ×bit-reversal tree). In real implemen-
tations, this can be pre-computed and processed to the
FFT/NTT algorithm in the form of a lookup table. For the
FFT algorithm, the coefficients of the polynomial are rational
domains; therefore, no additional operations are required.
In this case, the only thing to consider in the FFT algorithm
is to determine whether each polynomial belongs to the real
or image part of the complex vector. When Cooley-Tukey
and Gentleman-Sande are applied, it is divided into real and
image parts. However, it should be noted that all parts are used
during calculation. In the case of the NTT algorithm, since
the main operation is performed in the montgomery domain,
additional operations are required. Therefore, inevitably,
in Falcon, NTT is slower than FFT. For the Gentleman-Sande
algorithm, the coefficients produced when one butterfly oper-
ation is completed are doubled. Therefore, in the last layer, all
coefficients must be divided by the size of the vector. In the
reference implementation, this was processed through shift
operation in the montgomery domain.
The number of butterflies of FFT/NTT is calculated in half
the order per layer (ie, 256/512 times at 512/1024 security
level). Since it is impossible to hold in the register of ARMv8,
each polynomial is updated when the butterfly operation on
the original address is finished. This causes a lot of mem-
ory access load, so it is necessary that an implementation
strategy that can minimize memory access for solving this
mechanism. Therefore, in Section IV, we propose the optimal
implementation for FFT/NTT implementation in the ARMv8
environment.
C. PEFORMANCE PROFILING OF FALCON
REFERENCE CODES
In this section, we profile the Falcon code submitted to
the NIST PQC Competition 3 Round; and, we discuss the
optimization strategy in this paper. There are three types of
reference codes for Falcon. Of these, implementation using
AVX instructions is not of our interest because its target
platform is the CPU environment. Falcon’s reference imple-
mentation has an optimized implementation and a generic
implementation. The optimization implementation uses a
floating-point data type, and the general implementation uses
a 64-bit data type for approximating the floating-point oper-
ation. Currently, public libraries such as PQM4, PQClean,
and liboqs all have implementations that use approximation-
based 64-bit data types for generality [4]–[6]. However, the
ARMv8 platform provides floating-point-based instructions
in a compact way. Therefore, the target implementation of
our optimization technique is an optimized implementation
using Falcon’s floating-point data type. As far as we know,
Falcon’s development team did not submit the code for the
ARMv8-A series; thus, the code submitted to the 3 Round is
the best choice as a result. For profiling, the reference code is
compiled on Jetson Xavier’s ARMv8.2.
Table 2 shows the profiling performance of Falcon’s ref-
erence code in Jetson Xavier. Falcon consists of three parts:
KeyGen, Sign, and Verify. As shown in Section 1,
KeyGen generates the NTRU lattices and calls FFT/NTT
hundreds of times to solve the NTRU equation. The number
of times is variable; however, it is extremely rare to repeat
KeyGen’s main loop more than 5 times. Various versions
of FFT are called in internal functions including LDL∗that
KeyGen and Sign processes call. For this reason, construct-
ing Falcon’s optimization strategy is not easy. In addition,
the dividing process of all FFT/NTT in each inner function
is variable without working up to the first-order coefficients.
44450 VOLUME 10, 2022
