DOCUMENT: ARMv8_falcon.pdf PAGE: 6/15

Y. Kim et al.: Accelerating Falcon on ARMv8
TABLE 1. Summary of FP and ASIMD instruction set in ARMv8 platform [11].
TABLE 2. Profiling performance of Falcon reference codes on Jetson
Xavier (ARMv8.2), FFT(NTT) means FFT(NTT)-based polynomial
multiplication.
Based on the profiled data, the implementation logic of
Falcon’s FFT/NTT in Jetson Xavier should be redesigned
considering the number of vector registers and floating-point
instruction. Operations should be performed while handling
the maximum amount of information using the minimum
number of registers, and the memory access cycles must be
fast at the same time. In addition, since the number of layers
of FFT/NTT called from Falcon is constantly changing, The
optimization technique taking this into account is essential.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose several optimization
methods for Falcon in the ARMv8 environment.
In particular, when the security level is 5 (Falcon-1024), the
depth of the layer of FFT/NTT is odd because a polynomial of
order 1024 is used. These characteristics impair the generality
of optimization strategies and make parallel tasks inconsistent
in efficiency.
Our analysis showed that FFT accounted for 26% and
48% of the total clock cycles at KeyGen, Sign, while NTT
operations accounted for 18% and 65% in KeyGen and
Verify. Since FFT/NTT is based on the same Divide and
conquer algorithm, as a result, an optimization method that
can efficiently parallelize FFT/NTT-based multiplication is
required. For the SHAKE process that generates the seed,
there are optimization studies on the keccack algorithm on
embedded devices, but none of the studies on the optimal
implementation in the ARMv8 platforms as far as we know.
It is recommended to use the fully assembled XKCP library
generated by the keccack-development team to offload the
performance of ExpandA in the ARMv8 environment; how-
ever, this paper does not take this into account.
D. TARGET DEVICES: ARMv8-A PROCESSOR
ARM architecture is widely used in the embedded industry
due to its low power consumption and high performance
when compared to previous low-end processors, AVR and
MSP. According to their performance, ARM processors are
classified into M-series, R-series, and A series levels. Among
them, the ARM-A series provides the best performance. Fur-
thermore, the most recent version of an ARM processor is the
ARMv8 architecture.
The ARMv8-A series includes an ARM processor as well
as a NEON engine. Unlike the NEON engine, the ARM pro-
cessor does not support parallel processing, but it is adequate
for small tasks. Furthermore, the ARM processor includes a
barrel shifter, which can hide clock cycles for shift operations
in the operand, making it a very powerful technology. The
ARM processor’s register structure is made up of 64-bit
general-purpose registers x0-x30, and an A64 instruction set
architecture [12] is provided. The NEON engine is a powerful
parallel processing engine that supports 128bit vector reg-
ister v0-x31 and ASIMD instructions set architecture [11].
VOLUME 10, 2022 44451
