DOCUMENT: ARMv8_falcon.pdf PAGE: 7/15

Y. Kim et al.: Accelerating Falcon on ARMv8
Within a 128-bit vector register, this parallel processing can
be done in 64-bit, 32-bit, 16-bit, and 8-bit units. In addition,
the target device supports FP instruction to efficiently process
floating point operation. Table 1 describes the FP/NEON
instructions and clock cycles used in this study to optimize
FFT/NTT-based multiplication.
III. RELATED WORKS
Benchmarking research on Post Quantum Cryptography in
various environments has continued since the NIST PQC
competition started. NIST asked algorithm developers to
measure their performance in ARM-Cortex M4 and Artix-7
environments. In addition, not only performance evaluation
but also integration with commercial libraries and perfor-
mance indicators of protocols are one of the important evalu-
ation factors.
PQM4, benchmarking research conducted in an environ-
ment on ARM Cortex-M4, presented performance measure-
ment results for PKE/KEM and DSA algorithms. This study
provides basic guidance for frameworks targeting embedded
platforms [4]. In addition, recently, standalone implemen-
tations work has been done such as PQClean project [5].
Additionally, research on applying PQC to the application
layer continues [6]. This work can test PQC’s algorithm
in TLS/SSL protocol using liboqs, a library that inte-
grates PQC and OpenSSL. Also, performance evaluation of
PQC-DSA in V2X protocol-related work was recently pro-
posed. V2Verifier tests PQC-DSA in various autonomous
driving environments [2]. The key point of related studies
is that Falcon is competitive enough because it has a short
key and signature length. This advantage means that there
is no consideration of packet size in protocols, unlike other
DSA algorithms. Since the maximum signature size of Falcon
is less than 2000 bytes, it can be sufficiently applied to the
WAVE communication standard required in the autonomous
driving environment.
Since Falcon’s security is based on the long-proven NTRU-
lattice, the only consideration for the final competition algo-
rithm is the performance of KeyGen and Sign algorithm.
As explained in Section II-C, the main operation of KeyGen
and Sign algorithm is the FFT/NTT-based multiplication
algorithm. An optimization technique for ffSampling for
ARM Cortex-M4 environment was proposed in [13], but
this technique aims to reduce memory consumption by
approaching the memory layout modification point of view.
Unfortunately, as far as we know, performance optimization
studies targeting FFT/NTT of the Falcon algorithm do not
yet exist. On the other hand, various polynomial multiplica-
tion algorithms used in LWE/LWR-based schemes, includ-
ing Crystals-Dilithium, have been actively studied. In this
paper, we review various implementation studies for NTT
and Toom-Cook-based multiplication in the ARMv8 plat-
forms. Research on PQC in the ARMv8 environment has
been actively conducted starting with the implementation
for Newhope. [14] was the first to use an unsigned 16-bit
integer representation for NTT. In addition, parallel logic for
the NEON engine was proposed. The proposed Newhope
implementation was maximally compressed using barrel-
shifters etc. Finally, on the ARM Cortex-A53, [14] achieved
an 8.3x performance improvement compared to the reference
implementation.
Recently, an optimization method for Crystals-Kyber has
been proposed. NTT for 16-bit coefficients is used similarly
to the method proposed in [15], but the technique for Mont-
gomery reduction is redesigned because of the difference of
polynomial-ring. Additionally, all of Crystals-Kyber’s core
functions for symmetric functions have been accelerated
through ARMv8 encryption extensions. In the end, they have
achieved a performance improvement of up to 8.6x com-
pared to the reference implementation code. Optimization
techniques for NTT are constantly being updated. A method
to effectively load and store data for NTT multiplication used
by LWE/LWR based algorithms including Crystals-Dilithium
has been proposed in [16]. In addition, effective methods for
integrating depth-specific layers in NTT have been proposed
in [17]. These methods are methods that can be used through-
out embedded devices.
Except for ARM-based architectures, there are several
studies that implement lattice-based cryptography schemes
in various environments. Implementation method studies for
various lattice-based schemes have also been conducted on
GPU, which is one of the representatives of high-end pro-
cessors [18]–[22]. However, considerations in the FFT/NTT
implementation in a GPU environment are issues such as
thread placement per block and warp divergence. Due to the
characteristics of the GPU, one NTT per block is calculated in
parallel; therefore, the optimization strategy is significantly
different from the embedded environment. The core of the
FFT/NTT implementation in the embedded environment is
a strategy to reduce memory access cost and a strategy to
parallelize each coefficient. Since the number of registers
and their size is constrained in the embedded environment,
there are very small coefficients that can be kept in general
registers. In addition, in the case of GPU, the factors of
block and thread arrangement rather than the advantage of
PTX implementation take up a large cost for performance
improvement, but in the case of an embedded environment,
using assembly and reducing the number of instructions is an
important issue. Another difference from the GPU environ-
ment is that the embedded environment uses multiple cores
and the cost of creating threads is very high.
There are several studies for lattice-based cryptography
schemes on AVR and RISC-V devices. Implementation study
of NTRU in AVR environment was conducted in [23]. To per-
form the optimization in the AVR environment with 8-bit reg-
isters, [23] reduced the total cost of the entire cryptographic
operation by using the latest parameter set of NTRU and the
hybrid technique proposed in [24]. Since it is impossible for
the implementations of NTT to be combined in parallel logic
on an AVR environment, the authors proposed an implemen-
tation methodology that can achieve high performance and
resistance to timing attacks by minimizing the use of branches
44452 VOLUME 10, 2022
