DOCUMENT: ARMv8_falcon.pdf PAGE: 8/15

Y. Kim et al.: Accelerating Falcon on ARMv8
and conditions. A recent study was conducted that NTT could
be used through parameter modification for SABER [25].
In addition, by extending this, studies on the efficiency of
incomplete NTT in equipment such as RISC-V have been
conducted. In the case of Crystals-Kyber/Dilithium, it is
assumed that NTT transformation has been performed for
the public matrix, but in the case of SABER, NTT must be
applied to the public matrix in order to apply the NTT. There-
fore, during actual multiplication, the NTT is performed
three times, so the reduction of one layer has a great gain.
By using this, [26] proved and implemented that incomplete
NTT using 6 layers is the fastest in the RISC-V environment.
In RISC-V, no parallelization strategy has been applied,
as no SIMD-based implementation is yet available as a
basic-instructions.
IV. PROPOSED OPTIMIZATION STRATEGIES
In this section, we present various software-based optimiza-
tion techniques for FFT and NTT-based polynomial mul-
tiplication, which are the core operations of Falcon, using
NEON engine in ARMv8-A environment. From the perspec-
tive of FFT-based polynomial multiplication, since various
FFT multiplications based on FPC operations are utilized in
the Falcon algorithm, we basically present parallel imple-
mentations for FPC-based operations (FPC-MUL, FPC-DIV,
FPC-ADD, FPC-SUB), which are core operations of FFT,
using NEON engine. From the perspective of NTT-based
polynomial multiplication, we propose a CT Butterfly opera-
tion of NTT that maximizes the characteristics of paralleliza-
tion of NEON engine. In addition, since the Falcon digital
signature has a different polynomial degree for each security
level, the depth of the NTT and FFT for each security level is
different, so a memory optimization strategy considering this
is required.
A. FFT-BASED MULTIPLICATION
Some complex number operations are used in signature
generation and key pair generation. This complex number
operation can be approximated by IEEE 754 floating-point
operation. Therefore, it is encoded as a 64-bit Double type
and the operation is performed. A Falcon digital signature
provides FPC-MUL, FPC-DIV, FPC-ADD, and FPC-SUB,
which are the lowest level operations to efficiently process
these complex number operations. These FPC-MUL, FPC-
DIV, FPC-ADD, and FPC-SUB operations are mixed to form
many FFT multiplication (Standard FFT, Merging FFT, Split
FFT, LDL FFT, etc.) operations. Therefore, these functions
should be optimized to maximize the performance of FFT-
based multiplication. However, in an environment where
some floating point instructions are not supported, more com-
plex operations must be performed to process the floating
point operation, but the target device supports the floating
point operation as well as NEON engine capable of parallel
processing. Thus, we present parallel implementation tech-
nique for FPC-MUL, FPC-DIV, FPC-ADD, and FPC-SUB
operations, which are core operations of FFT multiplication
by utilizing FP instruction and NEON engine. Thus, we pro-
pose parallel implementations that simultaneously processes
two coefficient for FPC functions, which are core operations,
by utilizing FP instructions and NEON engine.
Unlike integer arithmetic, complex number arithmetic is
divided into real part and image part to perform operations.
In order words, (a+bi)+(c+di) operation becomes (a+c)+
(b+d)i by dividing into real part and image part. Algorithm 4
shows the parallel implementation of the proposed FPC func-
tions. In Algorithm 4, Input data are vector registers storing
two complex numbers, and Output data are vector registers
storing operation results for two complex numbers. First, the
FPC-MUL function is a function that multiplies two complex
numbers, and is the lowest-level function that is used as a core
in KeyGen and Sign of Falcon. Step 1-2 is the part where
the Real Part is calculated, and Step 3-4 is the part where
the Image Part is calculated. Through steps 1-4, the result
of complex multiplication of two coefficients in the 128-bit
vector register is returned. We designed the FPC-MUL func-
tion compactly by eliminating arithmetic instructions such
as SUB and ADD that may additionally occur by using the
computational characteristics of the FPC-MUL function and
fused MUL (FMLA, FMLS).
FPC-DIV is a division operation on two complex num-
bers and has the largest performance overheads among FPC
functions. In addition, the FPC-DIV function is frequently
used in LDL sampling of signature generation, and needs
optimization to improve performance in signature genera-
tion. We present a parallel implementation of the FPC-DIV
function for two coefficients utilizing the NEON engine.
Steps 5-14 show a parallel implementation of the division
process on two complex numbers. By utilizing FMLS and
FMLA instructions as much as possible, ADD and SUB instruc-
tions that may occur similar to FPC-MUL functions are
minimized to improve performance. Finally, Step 15-16 and
Step 17-18 are parallel implementations of the proposed
FPC-ADD and FPC-SUB, and addition and subtraction of
two complex numbers can be easily performed in parallel
with only FADD and FSUB instructions.
B. NTT-BASED MULTIPLICATION
In general, implementations of cryptographic algorithms
can be done sequentially or in parallel. Although sequen-
tial execution compute one operation at a time, the paral-
lel implementation uses a parallel module supporting the
SIMD instruction set to perform multiple operations at a
time. A parallel implementation ideally yields an X% perfor-
mance improvement over sequential execution, where X is the
number of simultaneous operations. For this reason, parallel
implementations typically achieve more accelerated compu-
tational processing than serial implementations. Therefore,
we present a parallel implementation technique of CT But-
terfly that performs 8 coefficients simultaneously considering
the size of NEON vector register and modulus of Falcon.
Several NTT algorithms are used in KeyGen, Sign, and
Verify of Falcon. Compared to other PQC digital signature
VOLUME 10, 2022 44453
