DOCUMENT: ARMv8_falcon.pdf PAGE: 11/15

Y. Kim et al.: Accelerating Falcon on ARMv8
FIGURE 2. Proposed memory optimization path of FFT/NTT for 512/1024 security level.
performed, only two memory accesses occur for the polyno-
mial when operating the actual two layers. In the case of the
standard implementation, when operating two layers, three
memory accesses for polynomial occur, so the reduction in
memory access by one may seem small, but in the case of
Falcon, it is a polynomial of order 512, and a total of three
(Inv)FFT/(Inv)NTT operation is required for FTT/NTT-based
multiplication. Therefore, the actual decreasing clock cycles
cannot be neglected. In addition, since the merging technique
is used twice( Merging#1/Merging#2), memory access
to two layers is omitted from the entire FFT/NTT transform.
The second is the register-holding technique. The above
technique is performed in the lower layer of FFT/NTT, and
when implementing the divide and conquer algorithm, the
memory access caused by interference with the nearest coef-
ficient is offset by maintaining the coefficients in the vector
register. Applying this, no memory access occurs, unlike the
standard implementation. Similar to merging, but different
in that register-holding is a row-wise fashion implementa-
tion and has a different number of affected layers. In the
lower layer of FFT/NTT, the coefficients to be calculated are
attached to each other; therefore, only two memory access
costs are incurred.
Since FFT/NTT implementations are essentially a divide
and conquer of polynomials, we need to access all coeffi-
cients along with the order of each polynomial. Generally,
the polynomial approach is done in a row-wise fashion.
However, in order to minimize the memory access cost,
it should be approached in a column-wise fashion. In our
analysis, the most efficient number of layers for merging
was two. Since this is not related to the order of polynomi-
als, the number of combined layers is maintained even at
the 1024 security level. From a merged depth perspective,
we present Merging#1 and Merging#2. In the case of
1024 security level, it seems that the merging technique can
be applied once again (Merging#3), but due to the charac-
teristics of FFT/NTT, it is necessary to move the coefficient
of the polynomial in the register for applying to the butterfly
method. As we analyzed, introducing Merging#3 incurs
an additional computational cost, so it is most efficient to
implement a butterfly less than the 64th degree polynomial
at 1024 security level through the standard/register-holding
techniques.
Even if ARMv8 supports Floating-Point (FP) instructions,
there are cases in which NEON engine’s FP operation cannot
be used for actual compilation reasons such as gcc options.
However, the approximation operation, using integer data
type, that does not use the FP operation does not convert the
number of bits because only the data type difference exists
(double -> uint64_t). Accordingly, the maximum polynomial
coefficient that can be maintained in the NEON register is the
same as when using the FP operation with two coefficients
even when using the approximation operation based on the
64-bit integer data type. Therefore, the number of merged
layers of FFT and the Register-Holding technique are still
applicable. Therefore, this technique can be applied to any
device that has 128-bit parallel operation support register.
D. POINT-WISE MULTIPLICATION
To implement Point-wise multiplication in the ARMv8 envi-
ronment, we take full advantage of the parallelization technol-
ogy of the NEON engine to accelerate optimization. For FFT
algorithm with FP coefficients in 64-bit units, ARMv8 can
keep up to two in the NEON register; so, the two coefficients
are processed simultaneously. Conversely, since NTT algo-
rithm is processed by integer coefficients in 16-bit units, each
44456 VOLUME 10, 2022
