DOCUMENT: ARMv8_falcon.pdf PAGE: 12/15

Y. Kim et al.: Accelerating Falcon on ARMv8
FIGURE 3. Proposed memory optimization technique for FFT/NTT algoritm.
coefficient can be kept in the NEON register, up to 8; there-
fore, eight coefficients are calculated simultaneously. In the
NTT implementation, Montgomery reduction operations are
still performed. The coefficients of polynomials which is the
result of NTT are still in the Montgomery domain.
V. EVALUATION
A. TARGET DEVICE: JETSON XAVIER
In this section, we evaluate the performance of Falcon soft-
ware incorporating the proposed FFT/NTT optimization.
We measured performance on Jetson Xavier boards. Jetson
Xaver board is an on-board unit that is widely used in
autonomous driving environments. The Jetson Xavier CPU
has 8 ARMv8.2 cores and the same out-of-order pipeline
as ARMv8. ARMv8.2 supports half-precision floating-point
processing, RAS, statistical profiling, and an improved mem-
ory model architecture when compared to ARMv8 [29].
It has a 64KB L1 data cache, a 128KB L1 instruction
cache, and a 2MB L2 cache, and it can run at up to
2.26GHz. We used VScode development tools in Ubuntu
20.04 environment, and used AArch64-gnu-gcc 7.5.0
compiler. Until now, most of research of falcon has been
conducted in the ARM Cortex-M4 environment, and since
there are no research results in the ARMv8 environment,
we provide detailed comparison with reference implementa-
tion of Falcon submitted to the NIST Round 3 Submission.
The reference implementation is composed of C language
which uses FP data type and the -O3 option is applied when
compiling, and the proposed implementation is composed of
assembly language.
B. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR NTT/FFT-BASED
POLYNOMIAL MULTIPLICATION
As mentioned in Section II, since the ARMv8 platforms
supports floating-point operations, the reference code, we are
comparing, is the optimized version of Falcon submitted
to 3 Round. Table 3 provides detailed comparison of Falcon
Round 3 Submission and FFT/NTT-based multiplication of
the proposed Falcon software. Compared to reference imple-
mentation in the NTT and InvNTT process, we basically
VOLUME 10, 2022 44457
