DOCUMENT: falcon_m4.pdf PAGE: 2/18

(the board can be used at up to 168 MHz), caches can be disabled because RAM and ROM
(Flash) accesses normally complete with minimal latency.
Most of the code is written in C, with some assembly routines. The compiler is GCC,
version 13.2.1. Relevant code generation and optimization flags are:
-O2 -mthumb -mcpu=cortex-m4 -mfloat-abi=hard -mfpu=fpv4-sp-d16
Note that the used M4 CPU includes the optional DSP and floating-point units; the latter is
not directly usable for Falcon signature generation, since it supports only 32-bit precision
(IEEE 754 type “binary32”); however, the floating-point registers are a convenient fast-access
storage area, which the C compiler uses, and which we also leverage in our assembly routines.
Key pair generation, signature generation and signature verification in Falcon all have
varying execution times (in signature generation and verification, this is due to the use of
rejection sampling, both for converting the message to sign into a pseudorandom polynomial,
and for the Gaussian sampling). The reported values are averages over 15000 key pairs and
signatures for each degree.
Scheme. The implemented scheme is the “padded” variant of Falcon, in which signa-
tures are padded to a fixed size (of 666 or 1280 bytes, respectively) and the signing process is
restarted (with a random nonce) if the signature cannot be encoded within that target size.
In the original scheme (tagged “orig” in table 1), a random 40-byte nonce and the mes-
sage are hashed together (with SHAKE256) in order to produce a random polynomial; we
also implemented a modified scheme (tagged “BUFF”) in which an arbitrary context string
and the hash of the public key are also injected in the SHAKE256 input, in the same way as
is done in ML-DSA[9]. Including this hash provides some extra security properties beyond
strict signature unforgeability[4] and helps with proving security in multi-user settings; this
may be part of what NIST will standardize into the upcoming FN-DSA standard. The BUFF
variant implies hashing the public key (with SHAKE256); the performance difference ob-
served in table 1 is exactly the cost of this extra hashing operation. The cost technically applies
to signature generation as well, but it does not make much of a difference in practice, since
signature generation is a lot more expensive (the costs listed for signature generation in ta-
ble 1 are for the BUFF variant). The “BUFF” variant also regenerates the 40-byte nonce when
the signature process fails and restarts, as suggested in [6]; this helps with provability, and
has no detectable impact on performance, especially since signature restarts are rare (about
1/230000 probability with Falcon-512).
Signature generation uses an internal PRNG. In the submitted Falcon implementation,
this PRNG was using a ChaCha20 variant; in this new implementation, SHAKE256 is used.
As will be explained in section 2, for this platform, the cost of the PRNG is only a small part
of the overall signature generation code.
Security Stance. Our implementation should be always correct and safe. In particular,
all operations should be constant-time, a traditional name that really means that it should not
be feasible to infer information on secret data from timing-based measurements. This should
hold not only on the ARM Cortex-M4 CPU, but also on most other CPUs compatible with
the ARMv7M architecture (i.e. roughly speaking, larger ARM CPUs in 32-bit mode). Such
a property can only be achieved on a best-effort basis, because it relies on individual instruc-
tions to be constant-time by themselves, and on any compilation layer not to turn apparently
2
