DOCUMENT: falcon_m4.pdf PAGE: 3/18

constant-time code into non-constant-time constructions, in particular by recognizing that
a variable value is a Boolean in disguise and using it in conditional jumps to shortcut some
computations. Since some platforms use hidden JIT compilation techniques (e.g. NVIDIA’s
“project Denver” and subsequent designs), whether constant-time properties are maintained
can be impossible to verify in practice.
In our implementation, this means the following:
– No memory access is performed at a secret-dependent address.
– No conditional jump uses a secret condition.
– At the assembly level, we do not use the conditional execution opcode (it). This opcode
appears to be constant-time in the M4 itself (i.e. the wrapped instructions take the same
amount of time regardless of whether they are executed or not), but it could plausibly
be subject to non-constant-time optimizations in larger CPUs (e.g. handling as a condi-
tional jump with speculative execution based on a prediction on the condition value).
– Pure computational instructions, including multiplications with a 32-bit or 64-bit out-
put size, are expected to be constant-time, to the exclusion of division opcodes (udiv,
sdiv), which we do not use on secret data.
An important caveat is that we do not try to achieve any kind of protection against power
analysis or fault attacks. Such attacks can be (potentially) mitigated only through a careful
analysis taking into account the physical characteristics of the target device, something which
cannot be done in all generality in portable software. The only side-channel attacks that we
attempt to thwart in our implementation are timing attacks.
Usability Stance. Our implementation is meant to be production-level; in other words,
it should be usable in various applications right away. It is optimized for an ARM Cortex-M4,
but it should run “as is” on larger ARMv7 platforms, possibly using more complex operat-
ing systems than what are typically encountered on microcontrollers. This has a few conse-
quences:
– The code is reentrant and thread-safe. No modifiable global data is used.
– The register r9 is not used by any of our assembly routines.
– Some effort has been made toward code compacity, e.g. by not fully unrolling time-
critical loops.
The register r9 is also called the “static base” in the standard ARM application binary
interface (dubbed AAPCS[2]). It is nominally reserved for any purposes (that the target plat-
form must document). In practice, that register may be used either to access thread-local stor-
age, or to support position-independent code. In the latter case, a given platform might im-
plement asynchronous interruptions as a signal delivery, and the signal handler may then rely
on the value of r9 to be correct. The operating system would not necessarily take care, or
even be able, to set the register to the correct value before entering the signal handler; it has
been reported that very early versions of iOS were operating in that way. If some routine tem-
porarily modifies r9 and a signal is delivered just at that moment, then execution may derail,
possibly in ways that can be leveraged by attackers to gain control of the system. This failure
mode would be hard to detect in unit tests. Fortunately, most operating systems, and in par-
ticular bare-metal microcontrollers (with no operating system at all), do not have such strict
3
