DOCUMENT: falcon_m4.pdf PAGE: 4/18

requirements on r9 and routines may use the register as a simple callee-saved register (e.g. like
r8). Neverthelss, to avoid the improbable but scary failure scenario described above, we shun
any use of r9.
Loop Unrolling and Code Size. Loop unrolling is a classic tool to decrease runtime
cost, since it lowers the cost of loop management, both directly (no need to update a loop
counter, no jump back to the loop start) and indirectly (without a loop counter, an extra
register is free, and some memory access offsets might be hardcodable). However, it also in-
creases the code footprint, which can be an issue on small embedded systems where code space
(ROM/Flash) may be of limited size. There thus are trade-offs between speed and code size.
In our implementation, we voluntarily avoided some unrolling, especially in the NTT and
SHAKE implementations. For instance, if using only signature verification, then the code
footprint totals to 11840 bytes. This includes 4096 bytes for the NTT tables (that could be
truncated to 2048 bytes if restricting the implementation to Falcon-512) and 4184 bytes for
the SHAKE core. The well-known XKCP implementation of SHA3/SHAKE[16] is faster
than our code, but also partially unrolled (four rounds), and its code footprint is 10632 bytes.
The speed we report here appears to be “the record” for signature verification, among
other reported numbers. It is faster than a recently published result from Choi, Yoon and
Seo[3]. However, our gains are mostly in the “auxiliary” parts (e.g. public key and signature
decoding), while our NTT and inverse NTT are slower than theirs, because our code is not
unrolled (but a lot more compact). It would be fairly easy to reduce the cost of our Falcon-
512 signature verification by about 50k cycles, by simply replacing the SHAKE implementa-
tion with the XKCP one1, and the NTT and inverse NTT with the code from [3]. The result
would be formally faster, though possibly less usable in practice due to the inflated code size.
Baseline. To estimate how fast (or slow) our implementation is, it may be relevant to com-
pare its performance with that of the other lattice-based signature scheme selected by NIST,
the Dilithium scheme (standardized as ML-DSA[9]). An assembly-optimized implementa-
tion is reported in [1]; for the lowest security level (“Dilithium2”), key pair generation, signa-
ture generation and signature verification cost 1.596, 4.093 and 1.572 million cycles, respec-
tively. On the same hardware, with our implementation, Falcon-512 has a much more ex-
pensive key pair generation (about 45 times), more expensive signature generation (5.4 times),
but faster verification (4 to 6 times faster, depending on whether the BUFF or original variant
is used). This highlights that Falcon is challenging but not impossible to use for generating
keys and signatures on microcontrollers, but is also substantially more efficient for signature
verification (and with a lower RAM usage). Since Falcon keys and signatures are also much
shorter than ML-DSA’s, we envision that Falcon, once standardized (under the name FN-
DSA), will be a preferred choice for the common scenario of an embedded device verifying a
signature on its upgradable firmware at boot time.
1This would require some slight changes in the caller sites, because we access output SHAKE
bytes directly from the SHAKE context, which relies on that context using little-endian without the
even/odd-indexed split which is commonly used in 32-bit SHAKE implementations such as XKCP.
4
