DOCUMENT: falcon_m4.pdf PAGE: 6/18

SHAKE is used in key pair generation for producing candidate pairs of small polynomials
(f, g). In signature generation, SHAKE is mostly used as a source of pseudorandom bytes for
the Gaussian sampling, which is performed 2n times (with n being the degree, 512 or 1024).
We see in figures 1 and 2 that for signature generation, the time spent in performing SHAKE
computations is slightly over 10% of the total, and less than 7% for key pair generation. There-
fore, optimizing SHAKE will not matter much for the overall costs of these two operations.
However, it is the dominant cost in signature verification.
2.2 Memory Accesses
Efficiency of RAM accesses on the M4 depends on a number of parameters; we list here some
useful remarks.
Alignment. The M4 can in general be considered to tolerate unaligned memory accesses.
If an unaligned 32-bit value must be read from RAM or written to RAM, the CPU will break
it down into two or three accesses, but the overall overhead will be lower than if the same ac-
cess split was performed in software. It should be noted that the opcodes that can read or write
several 32-bit words in a single instruction (ldrd, strd, ldm, stm) do not tolerate unaligned
accesses, and trigger a CPU exception if the address is not a multiple of 4. In our implemen-
tation, we ensure that all temporary values are suitably aligned (in fact, 256-bit alignment of
the temporary buffer is enforced); unaligned accesses may happen mostly when serializing or
deserializing data from bytes (e.g. hashing the message, or decoding the public key).
Store Buffer and Pipelining. Memory store operations in the M4 (str) use an inter-
mediate store buffer which is used to perform the actual store operation asynchronously. This
means that a lone store can usually be considered to execute in one cycle, but that stalling can
happen if the instructions immediately before or after the store also access memory. Succes-
sive str operations pipeline, e.g. a sequence of three stores will execute in three cycles. Note
that, in the absence of stalls, two successive str opcodes use two cycles while a combined
strd opcode uses three cycles; a consequence is that in tight loops, strd should be avoided
(but its use should otherwise be recommended in that it promotes code compacity).
The M4 can pipeline memory accesses more generally, between loads and stores, pro-
vided that they don’t have extra dependencies (specifically, pipelining is prevented if a load
operation modifies a register which is used to compute the address of the next load or store
instruction). A sequence of n ldr opcodes (with no dependencies) will execute in n +1 cy-
cles. The double-load instruction (ldrd) executes in three cycles but does not pipeline; thus,
a sequence of two ldrd uses 6 cycles while an equivalent sequence of four ldr will use only
5 cycles.
This leads to the following guidelines for optimizing memory accesses:
– In general, memory loads should be grouped together in sequences of ldr instructions
(to leverage pipelining). A “load multiple” opcode (ldm) can offer the same performance
as a pipelined sequence of loads with a more compact code, but only if the target addresses
are successive. ldrd should be used only when exactly two values must be read from two
successive memory slots, and there is no immediately preceding or following memory
access with which these loads could be pipelined.
6
