DOCUMENT: falcon_m4.pdf PAGE: 7/18

– Memory stores can be grouped together to the extent that it is compatible with pipelin-
ing, but may also be spread out and interleaved with computational instructions so as
to benefit from the store buffer. n str opcodes, properly pipelined or spread out, will
execute in n cycles, which is faster than what a “store multiple” opcode (stm or strd)
can achieve.
Contention with Instruction Fetching. The M4 must perform memory accesses to
fetch instructions to execute. In general, this happens in parallel with explicit memory ac-
cesses, but it may happen that the two accesses somehow compete for the same resources,
and stalls happen. The exact conditions for this event are not documented. Heuristically, this
problem can be avoided by ensuring that instructions are 32-bit aligned: individual instruc-
tions are encoded over either 16 bits or 32 bits; stalls due to contention with the instruction
fetching unit may happen when instructions with a 32-bit encoding are located at an address
which is not a multiple of 4. Purely computational routines which work on registers only are
not impacted by such stalls, and can mix 16-bit and 32-bit instructions freely (and, in general,
16-bit instructions should be used when possible since that promotes code compacity). How-
ever, routines that need to perform memory accesses (for instance a Keccak-f implementation
for SHAKE) should strive to ensure alignment of all 32-bit instructions, by either not using
any 16-bit instruction, or pairing such instructions together. At the assembly level, most 16-bit
instructions can be converted to 32-bit instructions by adding a .w suffix to the instruction
name.
Floating-Point Registers. The M4 includes a floating-point unit, which is not really us-
able for Falcon since it supports only the “binary32” IEEE 754 type. However, the floating-
point registers can be used as a temporary storage area. There are 32 such registers (s0 to
s31) and, in the call convention (AAPCS), s0 to s15 are caller-saved, i.e. the callee can use
them without saving them beforehand. The vmov opcode can move a value between a general
purpose register and a floating-point register in one cycle, which is faster than stack accesses.
There is a vmov variant that can copy two values (in two cycles), while using only one 32-bit
instruction, which is good for code compacity.
Interconnection Matrix and Caches. It is often said that the M4 does not have caches,
and thus look-up tables with secret addresses should not induce information leaks through
timing measurements. This is not a correct assertion. The ARM Cortex-M4 is, really, a vir-
tual design for a CPU (usually called an IP, as “intellectual property”), which a hardware
vendor will integrate with other elements into an actual physical chip. Typically, that chip
will be dubbed a SoC (system-on-chip) or a microntroller, and will include some RAM and
ROM/Flash, as well as various I/O pins and controllers for extra hardware, possibly with
DMA accesses. The M4 itself does not include caches, but caches may be added by the inte-
grator.
Taking as an example the STM32F407VGT6 microcontroller (which is the one in the
test board that we used for our benchmarks), its datasheet includes the diagram which we
reproduce on figure 3.
We see that the CPU itself communicates with its RAM, Flash and peripherals through a
large interconnection matrix (“Bus matrix-S”) which arbitrates between concurrent accesses.
7
