DOCUMENT: falcon_m4.pdf PAGE: 8/18

64-Kbyte
CCM data RAM
ARM
Cortex-M4
GP
DMA1
GP
DMA2
MAC
Ethernet
USB OTG
HS
I-bus
D-bus
S-bus
DMA_P1
DMA_MEM1
DMA_MEM2
DMA_P2
ETHERNET_M
USB_HS_M
ICODE
DCODE
ACCEL
Flash
memory
SRAM1
112 Kbyte
SRAM2
16 Kbyte
AHB1
peripherals
AHB2
peripherals
FSMC
Static MemCtl
APB1
APB2
Bus matrix-S
Fig. 3: Interconnection matrix in the STM32F407VGT6 microcontroller.
Arbitration is needed because each connected element (e.g. an SRAM block) cannot per-
form two accesses simultaneously, and thus there can be accesses occuring at the same time
(e.g. from the CPU and from a peripheral performing DMA) that compete for the same re-
source; in such a case, one of the accesses must be stalled for a cycle. The exact method by
which competing accesses are detected, and which access gets stalled in that case, is not fully
documented. Many similar interconnection matrices detect potentially overlapping accesses
by matching a subset of the address bits (which is more efficient than checking all bits, and
heuristically sufficient on average). This implies that I/O activity, potentially triggered by an
adversary at precisely chosen times, may imply DMA activity which may or may not com-
pete with RAM and Flash accesses from the code, thus revealing, through timing differences,
parts of the addresses involved in the memory accesses from the CPU. It is not clear how fea-
sible such an attack is on the STM32F407VGT6 microcontroller, but it is plausible enough
that a variant of such an attack may apply to some similar microcontrollers and SoCs. This is
enough to warrant our stance of making no memory access at a secret address whatsoever.
Figure 3 also shows an element called “ACCEL” which is really a pair of caches, which
are used to optimize read accesses from the Flash memory (the two separate caches are for
instructions and data, respectively). In our benchmarks, we disable these caches, since they
are not needed at the relatively low clock frequency of 24 MHz. These caches are however
quite useful at higher clock rates; the board can be clocked at up to 168 MHz, and out-of-
cache read accesses incur large penalties (5 cycles extra latency) at these rates. Of course, active
caches imply the possibility of cache attacks, further highlighting the temerity of using look-
up tables with secret addresses.
8
