DOCUMENT: falcon_m4.pdf PAGE: 9/18

It should be noted that at high frequencies, the Flash element cannot provide instructions
fast enough to feed the CPU; the maximum bandwidth is 128 bits per 5 cycles (at 168 MHz),
in that particular microcontroller. If a long sequence of 32-bit instructions is executed and
falls outside of the instruction cache (or that cache is disabled), then the CPU will receive only
4 instructions per 5 cycles, implying an up to 25% slowdown. This effect is mitigated by using
the instruction cache, but only for routines which fit in that cache; long unrolled sequence
can thus have a detrimental effect on performance. Judicious use of 16-bit instructions can
help lower the CPU bandwidth requirements, but can be applied only in some situations (in
particular, most 16-bit instructions can use only the “low” registers r0 to r7) and can break
alignment of other instructions, which can lead to in-CPU contention with the fetch unit, as
described previously.
2.3 Key Pair Generation
For key pair generation, we mostly reuse the implementation from ntrugen[15]. That imple-
mentation improved on the original Falcon code by using a stricter memory management
(yielding a lower RAM usage and better caching of internal values) and replacing all floating-
point operations with fixed-point (over 64 bits). In our implementation, we merely added
some inline assembly for four operations:
– halving an integer modulo a small prime p;
– Montgomery multiplication modulo a small prime p;
– fixed-point multiplication;
– fixed-point squaring.
The halving operation deserves some explanations because it leverages integer multiplication
in a non-obvious way. The inputs are an integer x and a modulus p, with p being a 31-bit
prime, and x an unsigned integer in the [0, p−1]range. If x is in register r0 and p is in register
r1, then the halving process would naturally use a 4-instruction sequence, which is about
what is obtained by letting the C compiler translate the C code:
lsls r2, r0, #31 @ r2 <- (x << 31)
and r2, r1, r2, asr #31 @ r2 <- p & -(x & 1)
adds r0, r0, r2 @ add p to x only if x is odd
lsrs r0, r0, #1 @ x is even, halve it
But we can do better, in three instructions only:
ubfx r2, r0, #0, #1 @ r2 <- 1 if x is odd, or 0
umlal r0, r2, r2, r1 @ add p to x only if x is odd
lsrs r0, r0, #1 @ x is even, halve it
The key to this sequence is the use of umlal, which computes a 32 ×32 →64 multiplica-
tion, and adds the result to a 64-bit accumulator; we use it here to add either 0 ×p or 1 ×p
to x. Conceptually, a large multiplication followed by a 64-bit addition ought to be vastly
more expensive than a logical and and a 32-bit addition, but in the ARM Cortex-M4 umlal
executes in one cycle, making it worthwhile to use.
9
