DOCUMENT: falcon_m4.pdf PAGE: 10/18

This is in fact a general pattern: the DSP extension provides several opcodes that per-
form a large multiplication, then followed by one or two additions (in particular umlal and
umaal), which execute in one cycle, i.e. as fast as a mere 32-bit addition. These opcodes are
quite versatile and can be used to implement some operations such as shifts faster than the
“normal” opcodes, mostly because they can write to two distinct registers in the same cycle.
2.4 Signature Generation
As illustrated in figure 2, more than 2/3 of the cost of signature generation is in the floating-
point operations, hence optimization efforts should focus on these operations.
Floating-Point Operations. Floating-point values and operations in Falcon follow
IEEE 754[8], with the type “binary64” and the rounding policy “roundTiesToEven”. The
C language standard allows the C compiler to temporarily extend the precision, and (under
some conditions) to contract expressions to leverage extra opcodes such as fused-multiply-
add (i.e. computing xy +z in one opcode without intermediate rounding). In order to strictly
follow the same computations inside Falcon as on any other architecture, we cannot let the
compiler perform such optimizations. Moreover, we also want all operations to be performed
in a constant-time way, not leaking any information on the individual values through vari-
ations in the execution time; this is typically not ensured by compiler-provided emulation
routines on FPU-less hardware. For these reasons, on platforms where there is no suitable
hardware for IEEE 754 operations, the Falcon code must store floating-point values in an
integer type (uint64_t) and emulate the operations with custom routines that take care to
operate in a constant-time way.
We optimize six such operations, each with a specific assembly routine:
– fpr_scaled: given a 63-bit integer m (signed) and an exponent e (small integer, usually
zero in practice), convert 2em into a floating-point number.
– fpr_add: given floating-point numbers x and y, compute x +y or x−y. Negation in
floating-point values is only flipping the sign bit, hence in our situation we can consider
it to be basically free, and thus addition and subtraction have the same cost (and use the
same routine).
– fpr_add_sub: given floating-point numbers x and y, compute x +y and x−y. This hap-
pens notably in FFT and inverse FFT transforms, and some work can be shared between
the two operations2
.
– fpr_mul: given floating-point numbers x and y, compute xy.
– fpr_div: given floating-point numbers x and y, compute x/y.
– fpr_sqrt: given floating-point number x, compute √x.
In table 2, we list how many of each operation occur on average in a Falcon-512 signature
generation, and the cost (in clock cycles) of each corresponding routine. The number of invo-
cations for fpr_scaled, fpr_add and fpr_mul may vary (due to the use of the rejection
method in the Gaussian sampling), but experimentally the standard deviation is low, and the
actual number is almost always within 1% of the average.
2I think that I did not come up with that optimization concept myself; I saw this done somewhere.
However, I do not remember where. If you have more information please tell me, so that I can properly
credit the original inventor.
10
