DOCUMENT: falcon_m4.pdf PAGE: 12/18

Floating-Point Format and Assumptions. splits into three elements:
A “binary64” value is a 64-bit word which
– a sign bit s of value 0 (positive) or 1 (negative);
– an exponent e in the [0, 2047]range;
– a mantissa m in the [0, 252
−1]range.
In general, this represents the value (−1)s2e−1075 (252+m). There are some special cases, which
use the extreme values of the encoded exponent range:
– If e = 0 then the value is either zero (if m = 0) or a denormalized value (if m ≠ 0).
Denormalized values are also often called “subnormals”. In such cases, the represented
value is (−1)s2−1074m (i.e. +1 for the exponent, but no +252 for the mantissa).
– If e = 2047 then the value is either an infinite (if m = 0) or a special Not-a-Number
(NaN) (if m ≠ 0). NaNs are generated from “impossible” operations such as taking the
square root of a negative value.
When an operation yields a result with too large an exponent, such that instead an infinite is
obtained, then this is an overflow. If the exponent is too low and a denormalized value is pro-
duced (or an even lower value that is rounded to zero), then this is an underflow. For more
information on floating-point format, refer to the IEEE standard[8] and the very useful tu-
torial from Goldberg[10].
In Falcon, we can assume that NaNs, overflows and underflows do not happen. No
operation in signature generation leads to any of these conditions. Divisors in fpr_div are
never zero; fpr_sqrt is always invoked on positive values. These assumptions were heuris-
tically assumed (and corroborated with measurements) in the original Falcon submission,
and more recently formally proven true[7], with encoded exponents always in the [547, 1102]
range3. The only special case that must be handled by the code is zeros. Note that there are two
zeros, a positive and a negative one (depending on the sign bit s); in our context they are in-
terchangeable, since floating-point values are ultimately rounded to integers when producing
the final signature, and the sign of any zero will be ignored. We still prefer to follow the strict
IEEE 754 rules so that unit tests can validate that internal values are correct. In particular:
– For any x, x−x (and x +(−x)) yields a positive zero, not a negative one.
– For any x and y, the sign of xy is the XOR of the signs of x and y, including if either or
both is a zero. The same holds for x/y.
– √x is well-defined when x is a negative zero, and yields a positive zero.
Floating-Point Additions. It can be seen in table 2 that floating-point additions are
more expensive than floating-point multiplications. This is due to the fact that additions in-
volve two shifts of 64-bit values by secret amounts, and these operations are expensive:
– The two mantissas must be aligned together; that is, if the exponent of x is e and its man-
tissa is m, and y has exponent e′and mantissa m′with e′ ≤e, then m′, as an integer,
3That paper also detected that the previous implementation was trying to handle underflows by
rounding them to zero, but mishandling an edge sub-case; since underflows cannot happen in Falcon,
we can simply ignore that case and not even try to handle underflows in any way.
12
