DOCUMENT: TWfalcon.pdf PAGE: 2/25

2 TWFalcon: Triple-Word Arithmetic for Falcon
The fourth digital signature scheme Falcon [PFH+22] is currently being drafted as a
standard under its new name FN-DSA and target of this paper. Falcon was selected by
NIST for its favorable balance of performance, security, and implementation compactness,
making it seemingly a promising candidate for deployment in constrained environments
such as embedded systems and IoT devices.
Despite its benefits for embedded systems, Falcon also poses considerable drawbacks
for these platforms. Most prominently, Falcon relies on double-precision floating-point
arithmeticforitskeygenerationandsignatureoperations. Firstly, notallembeddedsystems
are able to perform double-precision floating-point arithmetic. Larger constrained devices
often feature an Floating-Point Unit (FPU) for these operations, but highly constrained
ones typically do not. Devices based on a Cortex-M4 or Cortex-M33 have an optional
single-precision FPU, while for higher-end processors like the Cortex-M7 a single-precision
FPU is always available, but the double-precision FPU is optional [Yiu16, Arm25]. Vendors
can therefore choose to design in Cortex-M7, but still disable the use of double-precision
for code-size, performance, or power consumption reasons.
Secondly, even the double-precision FP arithmetic is not sufficient for the security proof
of the Falcon digital signature scheme. Recall that in [PFH+22] the security proof only
holds, i.e. resisting attacks of 264 signature queries, when the double-precision errors are
bound by 2−46. [PFH+22] shows the values can in fact go up to 2−40 and thereby only
ensuring protection against 253 queries. In this work we will show that in practice the
error values even go up to 2−37, which gives concern for attack avenues escaping the proof
guarantees.
One direction is to switch out the double-precision operations: [PFH+22] suggests to
emulate all floating-point operations (such as FFTs and Gaussian sampling) using integer
arithmetic implementing the IEEE 754 binary64 operations [IEE19]. This conversion
significantly slows down performance [Por19, Por25a], but can then be run on devices
without a double-precision FPU. This, however, does not impact security. We will compare
the performance of our implementation against [Por25a].
Triple-Word Floating-Point (TW) arithmetic [FMP19] are algorithms designed to
extend the precision of numerical computations by representing a high-precision value as
the sum of three lower-precision floating-point numbers. By decomposing a value into
three components (i.e., the high, middle, and low words) triple-word arithmetic enables
more precision and therefore more accurate arithmetic. Consequently, this approach yields
reduced floating-point errors, leading to a Gaussian sampler implementation that abides
by the proven error bounds.
Contributions. In this paper we observe that for embedded devices that have a single-
precision FPU available, Falcon can be implemented securely with a performance penalty of
85% compared to integer-emulated Falcon. By representing higher precision floating-point
values in three single-precision floating-point values, Falcon signature generation can be
performed at a lower error rate. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to apply
triple-word arithmetic to a cryptographic scheme.
Because our approach only requires a single-precision FPU compared to the double-
precision FPU for the original implementation, it can be enabled on a larger range of
embedded devices. It offers a practical balance between computational efficiency, numerical
accuracy, and the security of Falcon, making it a compelling choice for high-assurance
software and hardware implementations of Falcon.
More concretely, in this work:
• We are the first to apply and analyze the application of triple-word arithmetic
to a cryptographic scheme, using three single-precision floating-point values for
combined precision. To make it fully applicable to the Falcon digital signature
