DOCUMENT: TWfalcon.pdf PAGE: 3/25

Stef Halmans, Christine van Vredendaal , Tobias Schneider , Frank Custers and Tim
Güneysu 3
scheme, we develop multiple new triple-word arithmetic operations that were not
covered in [FMP19].
• We show that the security proof gap pointed out in [PFH+22] is in fact larger than
implied. The security proof bounds the floating-point error of the Gaussian sampler
at 2−46. Based on experimental data, it was claimed that the double-precision
standard achieves a floating-point error bound for the Gaussian sampler of 2−40
,
i.e., 6 bits less than required for the security proof. We show that this error bound
is actually 2−37, i.e., 9 bits less than required by the proof. Although this has not
been utilized in a practical attack, this deviation from a Gaussian distribution gives
concern for future exploitation, as in theory, with the current security proof, fewer
than 264 signature queries are allowed, contrary to the NIST PQC requirements.
• We offer a constant-time implementation of Falcon using triple-word arithmetic. This
implementation contains both security levels and is created for the Cortex-M4.
• We analyze the practical rounding errors leading to the security proof gap in current
implementations of Falcon in comparison to our new implementation. We show that
ours gives sufficient security guarantees, while the existing does not.
• We show that the performance impact of our implementation compared to the heavily
optimized integer-emulated implementation by [Por25a] is on average less than 85%
for both Falcon parameter sets, while having error values that are much better than
required by the proof. The integer-emulated FP arithmetic uses a 64-bit integer to
emulate the 64-bit floating-point standard (double-precision).
Outline. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives an overview
of the Falcon scheme, floating-point arithmetic and the core algorithms of triple-word
arithmetic. In Section 3 the security proof for the Gaussian sampler in Falcon is analyzed,
precision tests are recreated, and its resulting implications are discussed. Section 4 presents
how to use triple-word arithmetic in Falcon. We show how the core algorithms can be
applied, introduce new algorithms, and adapt all TW algorithms to be constant-time for
additional security. In Section 5 we analyze the implementation. We show its improved
error values compared to double-precision and integer emulated Falcon, as well as evaluate
the performance impact of using TW arithmetic in Falcon. Finally, Section 6 concludes the
paper. We summarize our results and discuss its security implications, as well as theorize
how integer emulation could be adapted to achieve higher precision.
2 Background
In this section, we first introduce the Falcon digital signature scheme. Then we discuss
the necessary theory on floating-point numbers and Triple-Word Floating-Point (TW)
arithmetic.
2.1 Falcon
The signature scheme Falcon [PFH+22] (to be standardized as FN-DSA) is a lattice-based
hash-and-sign scheme, based on the GPV framework which is proven secure under the
quantum oracle model [GPV08, BDF+11].
In short, the GPV framework uses a public matrix A ∈Zn×m
q defining a q-ary lattice
Λq, and a secret trapdoor basis B ∈Zm×m
q for the orthogonal lattice Λ⊥
q (⊥meaning
orthogonal), with B ×AT ≡0 (mod q).
