DOCUMENT: TWfalcon.pdf PAGE: 4/25

4 TWFalcon: Triple-Word Arithmetic for Falcon
Table 1: Average number of invocations of floating-point operations in one Falcon-512
signature generation [Por25a].
Operation fpr_of add add_sub mul div sqrt
Invocations 11,992 62,680 32,768 106,685 2,304 512
To sign a message x, one first computes a preimage c0 ∈Zm
q such that c0AT = H(x)
for some hash function H : {0,1}∗ →Zn
q. Using B, a nearby lattice vector v ∈Λ⊥
q is
sampled from a discrete Gaussian over Λ⊥
q , and the signature is s = c0−v. Verification
checks that sAT = H(x) and that s is “short”. The security relies on the hardness of
finding such short solutions without the trapdoor basis. The GPV framework suggests
using Klein’s sampler to sample from a discrete Gaussian. This is a randomized version of
Babai’s nearest plane algorithm [Kle00, Bab86].
Falcon is based on the NTRU lattice structure and the signature generation mostly
operates in the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) domain to accelerate polynomial arithmetic.
Discrete Gaussian sampling is performed using the ffSampling algorithm based on [DP16].
This algorithm constructs a tree structure by recursively splitting polynomials into smaller
subgroups, similar to how the FFT decomposes polynomials for multiplication. At each
node of the tree, an LDL∗decomposition ([GVL13, Chapter 4.1.2]) is applied, which is
later used to combine the results from the child nodes into the final sampled lattice point.
This process produces a Falcon tree, where the polynomials at the leaves are reduced to
constants. At the leaves, these constants serve as the mean and standard deviation for
sampling values from a discrete Gaussian distribution. The sampled values from the leaves
are then propagated up the tree by merging them, together with the LDL∗decomposition
results, toreconstructthelatticepointintheoriginal, higher-dimensionalspace. Essentially,
this algorithm is a fast Fourier variant of Babai’s nearest plane algorithm.
Arithmetic with real numbers is required throughout this process. Splitting and merging
in the Falcon tree requires floating-point multiplication and addition operations. The
LDL∗decomposition and Gaussian sampling require division of floating-point numbers.
Additionally, each leaf node is normalized, which involves both a square root and a division
operation. Of these, the square root is used least frequently (once per leaf), division is used
once per node and twice per leaf, while addition and multiplication are used extensively
at every node and leaf, and thus dominate the computational workload. In Table 1, the
average number of operation invocations is shown for Falcon-512, showing that addition
and multiplication are used a lot more than division and square root. The operation
fpr_of converts an integer to a floating-point value, and the operation add_sub computes
an addition and subtraction of the same inputs, an operation frequently used in the FFT.
The floating-point operations can be emulated with integer representations [Por19,
Por25a], using a 64-bit integer that emulates a 64-bit floating-point value, but this slows
down the performance significantly. As this is not the focus of this paper, we will omit
those technical details here.
2.2 Floating-Point Numbers
Falcon relies on real numbers in its signature generation algorithm. The dominant format
used to represent real numbers in computing systems today is the IEEE 754 Floating-point
standard [IEE19]. Herein numbers are represented as:
±d0.d1d2...dp−1 ×βe
,
where β is the base, di is a digit in base β, pis the precision, and the exponent eis within
the range [emin,emax]. In this paper we will assume the base β = 2. The binary layout of
a floating-point numbers follows a structured format, as shown in Figure 1. The first bit
