DOCUMENT: TWfalcon.pdf PAGE: 5/25

Stef Halmans, Christine van Vredendaal , Tobias Schneider , Frank Custers and Tim
Güneysu 5
Table 2: IEEE 754 precision and exponent properties.
Format Precision Bits Exponent Bits Exponent Min Exponent Max
binary32 24 8 -126 +127
binary64 53 11 -1022 +1023
represents the sign of the value. Then, bits ei represent the exponent value, computed as
e= |e0...en−1|2−b where b is a bias making sure both positive and negative exponents
can be represented. The last bits di represent the mantissa, storing the significant digits
of the number.
Figure 1: General binary floating-point representation, where every block is a bit and the
lowest bit is on the right.
In Table 2 the details about the single-precision floating-point standard, binary32, and
the double-precision floating-point standard, binary64, are shown. The IEEE 754 standard
defines several special values that handle edge cases in floating-point arithmetic, but for
Falcon only the case of zero is important. The ±0 is represented by setting all exponent
and fraction bits to zero. The sign bit distinguishes between +0 and−0.
Due to the finite precision, errors can appear in floating-point arithmetic. Rounding
errors occur when numbers that cannot be exactly represented are rounded to the nearest
IEEE 754-representable value, introducing small discrepancies. Cancellation errors happen
when subtracting two nearly equal numbers, causing a loss of significant digits and reducing
precision. Small floating-point errors can compound over multiple operations, ultimately
leading to noticeable inaccuracies.
The relative error measures how much a floating-point approximation deviates from
the true value:
|x−xf|
Relative Error=
|x|,
where x is the true value and xf is its floating-point representation. Machine epsilon (ϵ)
defines the upper bound on the relative error when rounding a real number to the closest
floating-point representation.
The Unit in the Last Place (ULP) is defined as the gap between two consecutive
floating-point numbers. The relative error of a representation is therefore bounded by half
the ULP.
Additional accuracy for floating-point representation can be gathered by adding extra
bits of precision. For single-precision (binary32 in IEEE 754) floating-point numbers,
the machine epsilon is ϵsingle = 2−23 ≈1.19 ×10−7, which corresponds to roughly 7
decimal digits of accuracy. In double-precision (binary64 in IEEE 754), ϵdouble = 2−52 ≈
2.22 ×10−16, providing about 16 decimal digits of accuracy.
2.3 Triple-Word Floating-Point Algorithms
Adding extra bits to increase precision is not always an option for constrained devices. As
an alternative, multiple floating-point values can be combined to compute arithmetic with
higher precision (see e.g. [Pri91]).
Algorithms optimized for the use of three floating-point values to gain higher precision
are specified by [FMP19]. These algorithms work for any implementation of floating-point
