DOCUMENT: TWfalcon.pdf PAGE: 10/25

10 TWFalcon: Triple-Word Arithmetic for Falcon
Figure 3: The frequency of each exponent of the combined error value (δc + δσ) for
Falcon-1024 from 100,000 signature generation runs.
3.2 Precision Testing in Practice
In the Falcon specification, it is stated that the test for error values was done by running
the signature scheme twice: once using floating-point arithmetic with 53 bits of precision,
and once with 200 bits of precision. The version with 200-bit precision is treated as having
“infinite precision”, and serves as a reference to compute the error value of the 53-bit
precision version.
To implement this in the latest Falcon code, [Por25b], the MPFR library is used
[FHL+07]. This library can be used to perform floating-point arithmetic with arbitrary
precision. All arithmetic performed in the Falcon code is modified to perform a high-
precision and low-precision computation. Additionally, all constants in the code are
recalculated to support computations with high-precision values. As explained in Sec-
tion 3.1, the errors that are important are from the mean (µ) and the standard deviation
(σ), which are the inputs to the Gaussian sampler. So, for these values the errors are
computed by comparing the low-precision value (treated as the computed result) with
the high-precision value (treated as the “real” value). Specifically, the absolute error is
calculated for the parameter µ, and the relative error is calculated for σ, or more precisely,
for σ−1, since σ itself is never computed in the code for efficiency reasons. The value µ is
derived from the splitting of the target polynomial t down the Falcon tree. Polynomial t
is computed using the inverse of the private key and the hashed message. In contrast, σ
corresponds to a leaf in the Falcon tree, and is obtained from the splitting of the private
key. This error computation is done for integer emulation, double type, and 53-bit MPFR
values to check if this would influence the values, which as expected, it did not.
Then, the combined error (δµ + δσ) is computed. Note, the value µ is denoted by the
value c in the precision evaluation proof in Falcon, and this notation is kept in Section 3.1.
Rather than storing the full floating-point values, only the exponent e is saved, where the
value is represented in the form 0.x1x2...xn·2−e, with each digit xi satisfying 0 ≤xi ≤9.
To get enough data points, the signature generation part of Falcon-1024 was executed
100,000 times, each time using a different randomly generated messages and key. The
results are presented in Figure 3, which shows a bar plot of the frequency distribution of
the error exponents observed across the 100,000 runs.
