DOCUMENT: TWfalcon.pdf PAGE: 13/25

Stef Halmans, Christine van Vredendaal , Tobias Schneider , Frank Custers and Tim
Güneysu 13
that the range of floating-point values used in both Falcon parameter sets exceeds that of
64-bit integers.
As shown in Table 4, the wide range of exponent values primarily arises in addition
and multiplication operations. In contrast, the exponent ranges for division and square
root are significantly narrower and entirely positive.
Formal Exponent Range Analysis A formal analysis of the exponent range was conducted
by [Hwa23], using the CryptoLine modeling tool [cry, LLS+24]. [Hwa23] analyzed the
floating-point computations in the FFT for polynomials appearing in Falcon. Relying on
the assumption that all input coefficients of polynomials lie within the range [−215
, 215),
they show that all non-zero intermediate floating-point values have absolute values within
the interval [2−476
, 227(252 + 605,182,448,294,568)]. This corresponds to an approximate
exponent range of [−476, 79].
Single-Precision Exponent Range Analysis The exponent range of the single-precision
floating-point format used by TW is [−126, 127]. While the positive exponent range
fits within the bounds proven by [Hwa23], the negative range is much smaller than the
required−476. In contrast, the double-precision format, with a range of [−1026, 1027],
fully accommodates the formal exponent range.
However, we’veshownthelowestexponentobservedinpracticeisfarfromthetheoretical
lower bound. The theoretical range assumes the full input domain of [−215
, 215) for
polynomial coefficients entering the FFT. However, because of the distributions of the
private key coefficients, the practical range is smaller. After running 100 million Falcon-
1024 instances, the lowest exponent encountered was only -105. This is well above the
theoretical minimum. The polynomial range of Falcon is discussed in more detail in
subsection 4.2.1.
While−105 is still within the single-precision representable range, TW represents
values using three components, where the second component has an exponent at least
24 less than that of the first. As a result, the second and third components may fall
outside the representable range of single-precision floats. Additionally, there can be rarely
occurring outliers that have even lower exponents.
To understand how to overcome this challenge, it is important to understand what
happens when a floating-point exponent becomes too small. At an exponent of−126,
the implicit leading 1 in the mantissa disappears, and the number is represented in a
subnormal format. This allows for smaller values to be represented by shifting the leading
1 further into the mantissa, at the cost of reduced precision. This continues until the
smallest representable subnormal value, 2−149, which has only a single bit of precision. If
the value drops even further, the value underflows and is rounded down to zero.
In the case of division, it could pose a problem if the underflowed value ends up
as the denominator. However, based on the observed exponent values for division, this
scenario does not occur in practice. It is also important to note that the formal exponent
range evaluation was limited to the FFT computation, which involves only addition and
multiplication operations. Division and square root operations were not included in that
analysis. As such, the formal bounds do not fully capture the behavior of the entire Falcon
computation pipeline, and just focuses on the parts where the range is largest.
For allotheroperations, underflowintroduces averysmallabsoluteerror, ontheorderof
2−149. Such errors are negligible and do not significantly affect the results of multiplication
or addition, where the absolute error is typically dominated by the largest values involved
in the computation. This phenomenon can also occur with normal floating-point addition
within the single-precision exponent range. For instance, a single-precision floating-point
addition of 2−100 and 2−76 results in 2−76, with an absolute error of 2−100 due to limited
precision (24-bit). When floating-point values with significantly different exponents are
