DOCUMENT: TWfalcon.pdf PAGE: 14/25

14 TWFalcon: Triple-Word Arithmetic for Falcon
added together, the term with the smaller exponent has progressively less influence on the
result as the difference in exponents increases, eventually having no influence at all. As
demonstrated in Section 3, such small floating-point errors do not pose security issues.
4.2 Additional Algorithms
In addition to the arithmetic operations described in [FMP19], several supplementary
algorithms are needed to fully replace floating-point arithmetic in Falcon with TW. These
include conversions between TW and integer values in both directions, supporting multiple
rounding modes: “round” (to nearest, ties to even), “floor” (toward minus infinity), and
“truncate” (toward zero), as detailed in Sections 4.2.3–4.2.5. We will refer to these functions
as conversion functions.
When operations are computed over values that fall within [−224
,224], the range
exactly representable by a single-precision floating-point value, a simpler, faster conversion
algorithm can be used. Determining whether this is possible depends on multiple inputs,
including the parameter µ. Parameter µ will be discussed in Section 4.2.1, and the other
parameters will be discussed in detail for each new TW algorithm.
Falcon also requires efficient algorithms for additional operations, or combinations of
operations, that can be implemented more efficiently through custom algorithms than
using the basic TW algorithms. These are discussed in Section 4.2.6.
4.2.1 Precision in Gaussian Sampling
To determine whether the input range of the conversion functions is within [−223
,223], we
analyze the range of parameter µ. Recall µ represents the mean of the Gaussian sampler
used at each leaf in the ffSampling algorithm (see Section 2.1). It is also denoted as c
when discussing the error values in Section 3.
While other input sizes are discussed in their respective sections, µappears in multiple
conversion functions and warrants separate consideration. The values of µ originate from
the preimage vector:
t=−
·FFT(c) ⊙FFT(F),
q
q
·FFT(c) ⊙FFT(f),
which is recursively split down the Falcon tree until only single-coefficient polynomials
remain at the leaves. For the leftmost leaf, µis equal to the leaf coefficient. For subsequent
leaves, µ is computed by combining the sampled value from the previous leaf with the
ℓ value from the parent node, derived from the LDL∗decomposition. As the algorithm
proceeds rightward in the tree, ℓ values from higher levels are combined with accumulated
sampled and target values, making an exact analytical range for µ difficult to obtain.
The range of the coefficients of t is known: coefficients of c(from the message hash) lie
in Zq, and after scaling by 1
q, they lie in (−1,0] or [0,1). These are then multiplied by F
and f, respectively, resulting in
n
i=1
n
ci·Fj and
j=1
n
i=1
n
ci·fj.
j=1
However, since Fj and fj are symmetrically distributed around zero, positive and negative
terms largely cancel and the overall magnitude remains similar to a single coefficient
multiplication.
The coefficients of f and g are sampled from a discrete Gaussian DZ,σf,g ,0 with
σf,g = 1.17· q/2n, and F and G are computed from the NTRU equation, making them
approximately O(√n) larger than f and g [PP19]. For Falcon-1024, σf,g ≈2.866 (mean
zero), and large outliers are extremely rare due to the Gaussian tail.
1
1
