DOCUMENT: TWfalcon.pdf PAGE: 16/25

16 TWFalcon: Triple-Word Arithmetic for Falcon
Therefore, we can conclude that all calls to fpr_of fall within [2−24
,224]. There-
fore, input values can be exactly represented using a single-precision floating-point for-
mat, and a new TW variable can be created where the first component is the input
value converted to a single-precision floating-point number and the others are set to
0. This conversion can be done on the Cortex-M4 through the assembly instruction
VCVT.u32.f32 <Sd>, <Sm> [Arm14].
4.2.3 Round
Rounding operations on TW can be implemented most efficiently if only the first component
of the TW representation is relevant for determining the integer part of the rounding
and the halfway point. The second component then only influences whether rounding up
or down should occur when the value of the first component lies exactly at the halfway
point. This means that the third component does not influence the result at all, and
can be ignored. This is guaranteed when the accurate output value lies within the range
[−223
,223], since the largest single-precision floating-point number that can represent a
halfway point exactly is 223
−0.5. Depending on the value of the second TW component,
this rounds either to 223 or 223
−1. Fortunately, the output of the rounding function is
always treated as a 16-bit integer, which comfortably fits within this range.
The rounding algorithm is slightly more complex than the conversion from an integer
to a TW value. First, it must be determined whether the first floating-point component,
x0, represents a halfway point. This is done by checking whether x0 −⌊x0⌋= 0.5. If this
condition is not met, the value x0 can simply be rounded to the nearest integer. However,
if the condition is true, a more involved procedure is required. In this case, x0 is first
truncated (i.e., its fractional part is discarded). Then, depending on whether the signs
of x0 and x1 are equal, the truncated value is either incremented or decremented. This
ensures that the rounding decision is correctly influenced by the second component of the
TW representation, resulting in an accurately rounded value. This results in Algorithm 3,
which can be made constant-time in software easily.
Algorithm 3 RoundTW(x0,x1)
1: f ←x0 −⌊x0⌋
2: if f ̸= 0.5 then
3: return round(x0)
4: end if
5: t←truncate(x0)
6: if sign(x0) = sign(x1) then
7: return t+ 1
8: else
9: return t−1
10: end if
On the FPU of the Cortex-M4, there is no hardware support for rounding or flooring a
floating-point value to an integer. The only available operation is truncation, which can
be performed using the instruction VCVT.f32.s32 <Sd>, <Sm> [Arm14]. To achieve an
efficient, and later, constant-time, implementation of the floor and round operations on
a single-precision floating-point value, the constant-time integer-emulated double-precision
versions from [Por25a] were adapted for single-precision values, resulting in an efficient
and constant-time implementation.
