DOCUMENT: TWfalcon.pdf PAGE: 17/25

Stef Halmans, Christine van Vredendaal , Tobias Schneider , Frank Custers and Tim
Güneysu 17
4.2.4 Floor
This operation is only invoked on the input value µ. Therefore, from the analysis in
Section 4.2.1 it can be concluded that the input range remains within [−223
,223] with
sufficient probability. This allows the use of the simpler and more efficient form of the
algorithm.
First, the floating-point computation x0 + x1 must be computed, but with the rounding
mode of the FPU set to “round toward minus infinity”. After this computation, the
rounding mode is restored to the default (“round towards nearest, ties to even”) and the
floor of the resulting sum can be computed. As described in Section 4.2.3, this can be
done using a single-precision adaptation of the double-precision integer-emulated code.
4.2.5 Truncate
The truncate algorithm is the only case where, in two out of three function calls, the
input value can be outside the range [−223
,223], however they are always non-negative.
The one instance where the input does fall within the valid range comes from the variable
s in the BerExp algorithm [PFH+22, Algorithm 14], which, as previously explained in
Section 4.2.2, remains within bounds. In the other two cases, the input value is the result of
a multiplication by 263. These computations occur in the algorithm ApproxExp [PFH+22,
Algorithm 13]. One involves the variable x∈[0,ln(2)], and the other involves css∈[0,1].
When either of these values is multiplied by 263, the resulting input clearly can exceed the
[−223
,223] range.
To achieve optimal performance, for both cases a separate algorithm is used. The
version accurate on the reduced range operates similarly to the floor implementation
described in Section 4.2.4. First, the sum x0 + x1 is computed with the rounding mode set
to “round toward zero”. Then, the result is truncated, which can be done on the Cortex-M4
with the instruction VCVT.f32.s32 <Sd>, <Sd>, as in Section 4.2.3.
The version accurate on the full range of the truncate algorithm is significantly more
complex and less efficient, especially when implemented in a constant-time manner. To
truncate a TW value with full precision, all three components of the TW representation
must be combined into a high-precision bit string. Based on the exponent of the leading
component, a cut-off point is determined in this bit string to extract the truncated integer
value of the full TW value (x0,x1,x2). The most challenging part of this process is
constructing the bit string with sufficient precision. A key complication arises from the
implicit leading 1 in the IEEE 754 floating-point representation. Due to this, the exponent
of x1 is at least 24 higher than that of x0, depending on where the next 1-bit appears in
the precision bits. This introduces intermediate zero bits between x0 and x1, and similarly
between x1 and x2. Subnormals in the floating-point representation would occur if x0 were
−127. Because the input values are multiplied by 263, subnormal representations do not
occur in x0. Subnormals may occur in x1 or x2, but if these components are that small,
they do not affect the final integer result, and any inaccuracies in handling them therefore
are irrelevant. Therefore, the truncate algorithm does not have to take subnormals into
account.
Another complexity arises from the possibility that the signs of x0, x1, and x2 may
differ. As a result, the bits cannot simply be concatenated with intermediate zeros. Instead,
they must be added or subtracted at the correct positions based on their signs. To construct
the high-precision bit string, three 32-bit integers are used, with only the lower 31 bits of
each being utilized. The 32nd bit is reserved for carry handling. This setup allows for a
total of 93 precision bits to be represented. Despite the TW format potentially offering
more than 72 bits of precision (plus intermediate zeros), the final result of the algorithm
always remains below 263 due to the input range. Therefore, any additional precision
beyond this point does not influence the truncated result.
