DOCUMENT: TWfalcon.pdf PAGE: 18/25

18 TWFalcon: Triple-Word Arithmetic for Falcon
Due to the varying number of intermediate zero bits between the components of the TW
representation, it must be determined in which of the three 32-bit integers the precision
bits of each component should be added or subtracted. In some cases, the bits may span
across two integers. This results in many possible cases, which should be handled in
constant-time to ensure timing side-channel resistance. Once all cases are correctly handled
and the high-precision bit string is constructed, a simple cut can be made at a position
determined by the exponent of x0. Since the input to this algorithm is always positive,
this cut directly yields the truncated integer value of the input.
4.2.6 Additional Algorithms
The last missing algorithms needed to implement Falcon with TW are division and
multiplication by 2e, combined addition/subtraction, and addition/multiplication between
a single-precision floating-point value and a TW value.
Multiplication and division by 2e increase and respectively decrease each exponent
by e, by multiplying each component with the exactly representable floating-point value
2e. While direct bitwise exponent manipulation is possible, on platforms such as the
Cortex-M4 floating-point multiplication is a single-cycle operation, making this approach
both simple and efficient.
Implementing the add_sub algorithm requires special care. In the integer-emulated
Falcon implementation, addition and subtraction on the same input are merged into a
single efficient algorithm. This is mostly not possible when using TW representation, since
the merging step obscures which inputs need negation. The only viable optimization is to
merge inputs once in a way that serves both operations. Furthermore, to achieve optimal
performance on the Cortex-M4 custom inline assembly is required to efficiently invoke the
algorithm, similar to the approach used in the integer-emulated implementation [Por25a].
This way the stack does not have to be used as all inputs and outputs fit in registers,
which is not possible under the standard C calling conventions.
Lastly, we designed additional TW algorithms aimed at improving performance. Where
possible, our implementation calls the addition and multiplication algorithms with one
input being a full TW value and the other a result of the fpr_of function. As described
in Section 4.2.2, this function produces a TW value with one non-zero and two zero
components. In such cases, x= (x0,x1,x2) and y= (y0,0,0), allowing optimizations by
skipping operations on zero components. For addition, only four values must be merged
instead of six, and both vec_sum and vseb reduce to four inputs while still producing the
required outputs. For the multiplication operation,[FMP19] already presented an algorithm
using a double-word and TW input; we extended the same technique to a single-precision
floating-point input and a TW.
4.3 Constant-Time Implementation
TW algorithms from [FMP19] are not constant time and need to be revised. The notion
of constant-time used in this work follows the definition provided by [Por25a]. We make
the assumption that all computational instructions executed by the FPU, including
division (vdiv) and square root (vsqrt), are assumed to run in constant-time. These
two instructions typically execute in 14 cycles, except when no further floating-point
instructions follow, in which case they complete in a single cycle. However, since the
instruction sequence is fixed and does not vary with input, the timing remains constant.
All custom assembly code written for the Cortex-M4F adheres strictly to these rules.
While the C code is written to follow constant-time principles at the source level, the
compilermaystillintroducebranchesorinstructionswhoseexecutiontimedependsoninput
values, potentially leading to timing side channels. Therefore, only the implementation
using assembly functions on the Cortex-M4F can be confidently considered constant-time.
