DOCUMENT: TWfalcon.pdf PAGE: 21/25

Stef Halmans, Christine van Vredendaal , Tobias Schneider , Frank Custers and Tim
Güneysu 21
What does this mean for a full Falcon signature generation? The results shown in
Table 6 show that the TW implementation is still slower by a factor of approximately
1.8. This slowdown is primarily due to the increased usage of addition and multiplication
operations, which are more frequent and faster with integer emulation.
Multiplication is the most frequently used operation, followed by addition and combined
addition/subtraction. Table 1 from Section 2.1 shows, for Falcon-512, how often each
operation is invoked. Although TW excels in operations like division and square root, their
infrequent use does not offset the slowdown from addition and multiplication. Additionally,
the TW implementation uses more registers, as each floating-point value uses three
values, instead of 2 in the integer-emulation, leading to increased overhead from stack
operations. Despite these factors, the TW implementation offers higher precision, and
next, in Section 5.2, the effect on the security will be discussed.
Table 6: Average cycle count of Falcon signature generation with integer-emulated and
TW arithmetic, assembly-optimized for Cortex-M4F, over 100 runs on the Nucleo-L4R5ZI.
Falcon- Integer emulated TW
512 22,493,190 40,684,889
1024 48,477,027 89,534,446
5.2 Gaussian Sampler Floating-Point Errors
In this section, the error values δµ and δσ resulting from running Falcon with TW arithmetic
are discussed. Further details on the importance of these error values for precision are
provided in Section 3. The code used for the error evaluation in Section 3.2 and in this
section is available at [TWF].
To compute the error values, the methodology described in Section 3.2 is followed. The
MPFR library is used for high-precision arithmetic and error computation [FHL+07]. For
the TW arithmetic, the fast, constant-time C implementations of all relevant functions
are used. The exponent values of the combined error (δµ + δσ) are shown in Figure 7.
These results demonstrate that the higher precision of TW, even when using faster and
less precise algorithms, yields significantly lower error values compared to the standard
double-precision implementation, as illustrated in Figure 3. As discussed in Section 3.1,
the combined error should remain below 2−46. This threshold is not met by the double-
precision implementation, which produces errors as low as 2−37 with a median of 2−43. In
contrast, the TW implementation performs substantially better, with the smallest observed
combined error being 2−57 and a median of 2−62. The use of double-word arithmetic is
not investigated, because it provides only 48 bits of precision. This is less precise than
the double-precision floating-point standard, which itself does not meet the required error
bounds. Like we discussed in Section 3.2, empirical testing cannot prove that a bound
will never be exceeded. Though, up to 11 lower exponents are allowed before the proven
bound is exceeded, which if we look at the exponential reduction of frequency for the lower
exponents, gives us high assurance that this will never happen. These results confirm that
Falcon implemented with TW provides more than sufficient precision for a provably secure
Gaussian sampler.
6 Conclusion
In this work we demonstrated that employing the double-precision standard in Falcon
yields observed error values of at most 2−37. For a security level of λ= 256, this restricts
the number of allowed signing queries to 247 in order to maintain a Gaussian sampler
implementation that is indistinguishable from an exact Gaussian distribution. This falls
