DOCUMENT: TWfalcon.pdf PAGE: 22/25

22 TWFalcon: Triple-Word Arithmetic for Falcon
Figure 7: The frequency of each exponent of the combined error value (δc + δσ) for
Falcon-1024 implemented with TW from 100,000 signature generation runs.
short of the 264 signing queries required by NIST. In contrast, Section 5.2 shows that
implementing Falcon with triple-word arithmetic achieves error values of at most 2−57
,
which is well within the proof requirement of 2−46. This ensures that the Gaussian
sampler remains secure and meets the necessary cryptographic standards. We show that
the exponent range of single-precision floating-point values is sufficient for all values
encountered in Falcon, enabling its use with TW for its implementation.
We note that our novel method to increase the precision is not the only possible
approach. The higher precision could also be reached with integer emulation, by creating a
custom standard that, like TW, uses three words to contain sufficient precision. However,
for such a custom standard, the required arithmetic operations are not straightforward,
and it is not known if this would result in a faster implementation. Additionally, for devices
with a double-precision FPU, the use of double-word precision could be investigated, to
yield the combined precision of two double-precision values. We leave both open as future
work.
In this paper, we also present novel TW algorithms, and as a result, enable a constant-
time implementation of Falcon using TW that can efficiently leverage the single-precision
FPU available on processors such as the Cortex-M4F. We show that performance com-
parison of Falcon on a Nucleo-L4R5ZI board with a Cortex-M4F, comparing an integer-
emulation and TW implementation, incurs a slowdown of less than 85%. For use cases
where such a slowdown is acceptable, our work enables a highly secure Falcon imple-
mentation, which, verified through testing, contains a provably secure Gaussian sampler
implementation available for a large class of constrained devices.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank Thomas Pornin and Thomas Prest from the
Falcon team for helpful discussions and clarifications regarding Falcon and preliminary
results. We further thank Andreas Hülsing for valuable discussions and insights during
the project. Lastly, we would like to thank William R. Duro and Markus Schönauer for
preliminary work and discussions.
Part of this work was supported by the SINFONIA project, which has received funding
from the Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF) as the centrepiece of NextGenerationEU
via the Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG) and Austria Wirtschaftsservice
