DOCUMENT: plantard_32bit.pdf PAGE: 1/15

arXiv:2309.00440v3 [cs.CY] 18 Feb 2024
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY 1
Yet another Improvement of Plantard Arithmetic for
Faster Kyber on Low-end 32-bit IoT Devices
Junhao Huang, Haosong Zhao, Jipeng Zhang, Wangchen Dai, Lu Zhou
Ray C. C. Cheung, Senior Member, IEEE, C¸ etin Kaya Koc¸, Fellow, IEEE, Donglong Chen
Abstract—In 2022, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) made an announcement regarding the stan-
dardization of Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) candidates.
Out of all the Key Encapsulation Mechanism (KEM) schemes,
the CRYSTAL-Kyber emerged as the sole winner. This paper
presents another improved version of Plantard arithmetic that
could speed up Kyber implementations on two low-end 32-bit IoT
platforms (ARM Cortex-M3 and RISC-V) without SIMD exten-
sions. Specifically, we further enlarge the input range of the Plan-
tard arithmetic without modifying its computation steps. After
tailoring the Plantard arithmetic for Kyber’s modulus, we show
that the input range of the Plantard multiplication by a constant
is at least 2.14× larger than the original design in TCHES2022.
Then, two optimization techniques for efficient Plantard arith-
metic on Cortex-M3 and RISC-V are presented. We show that the
Plantard arithmetic supersedes both Montgomery and Barrett
arithmetic on low-end 32-bit platforms. With the enlarged input
range and the efficient implementation of the Plantard arithmetic
on these platforms, we propose various optimization strategies
for NTT/INTT. We minimize or entirely eliminate the modular
reduction of coefficients in NTT/INTT by taking advantage of
the larger input range of the proposed Plantard arithmetic on
low-end 32-bit platforms. Furthermore, we propose two memory
optimization strategies that reduce 23.50%∼28.31% stack usage
for the speed-version Kyber implementation when compared
to its counterpart on Cortex-M4. The proposed optimizations
make the speed-version implementation more feasible on low-
end IoT devices. Thanks to the aforementioned optimizations,
our NTT/INTT implementation shows considerable speedups
compared to the state-of-the-art work. Overall, we demonstrate
the applicability of the speed-version Kyber implementation on
memory-constrained IoT platforms and set new speed records
for Kyber on these platforms.
Index Terms—Post-quantum cryptography, Kyber, Plantard
arithmetic, Cortex-M3, RISC-V
Junhao Huang, Haosong Zhao and Donglong Chen are with Guang-
dong Provincial Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research and Appli-
cation for Data Science, BNU-HKBU United International College, Zhuhai,
China. Junhao Huang and Haosong Zhao are also with Hong Kong Baptist
University, Hong Kong, China. Email: {huangjunhao, zhaohaosong, dong-
longchen}@uic.edu.cn.
Jipeng Zhang and Lu Zhou are with Nanjing University of Aero-
nautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China. E-mail: jp-zhang@outlook.com,
lu.zhou@nuaa.edu.cn.
C¸ etin Kaya Koc¸ is with Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
(China), Iˇgdır University (Turkey), and University of California Santa Barbara
(USA). E-mail: cetinkoc@ucsb.edu.
Wangchen Dai and Donglong Chen are with Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou,
China. E-mail: w.dai@my.cityu.edu.hk.
Ray C.C. Cheung is with City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China. E-mail: r.cheung@cityu.edu.hk.
Corresponding author: Donglong Chen.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the emergence of quantum computing technology, the
existing Public Key Cryptographic (PKC) schemes face a
significant threat. Shor’s algorithm on quantum computers can
solve the mathematical hard problems of these PKC schemes,
such as the big number factorization problem of RSA, the
Discrete Logarithm Problem (DLP) of ElGamal, and the El-
liptic Curve Discrete Logarithm Problem (ECDLP) of Elliptic
Curve Cryptography (ECC), in polynomial time. Although the
creation of quantum computers that can crack these PKCs is
still beyond realistic reach [1], the potential threat of quantum
computers has prompted the cryptographic community to seek
alternative solutions to replace the traditional PKC. In 2022,
NIST announced four finalists to be standardized for its
six-year Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) standardization
project [2]. Among them, CRYSTAL-Kyber [3] is the only
KEM standard, while CRYSTAL-Dilithium [4], FALCON [5],
and SPHINCS+ [6] are three digital signature standards.
Therefore, the efficient implementation of Kyber, the only
PQC KEM standard, will have great significance for the future
deployment of Kyber in realistic practices, such as cloud, edge,
and Internet of Things (IoT).
The application of IoT has spread out in various fields,
such as smart healthcare, home, and transportation domains.
Increasingly, IoT devices have been utilized to gather sensitive
data from individuals, corporations, military organizations, and
governments. It is estimated that by 2030, there will be around
30 billion interconnected IoT devices [7]. With the rapid
development of quantum computing, safeguarding sensitive
data on numerous IoT devices against quantum computers is a
pressing concern in the near future. Therefore, deploying NIST
KEM standard Kyber for these IoT devices is essential. The
ARM Cortex-M4 platform is a NIST-recommended platform
for evaluating PQC performance and memory consumption in
IoT scenarios [8]. It has sufficient memory and a powerful
Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) extension for PQC
implementation. However, there are also many low-end plat-
forms, such as the 32-bit ARM Cortex-M3/M0 and RISC-V,
which have more restricted power, computational resources,
and memory compared to ARM Cortex-M4. The above re-
strictions on these platforms result in different implementa-
tion requirements for Kyber. Both memory consumption and
efficiency are critical metrics for evaluating the applicability
of Kyber on low-end IoT devices. Therefore, it is crucial
to conduct more in-depth research to achieve efficient and
feasible Kyber implementation on these IoT devices in the
