DOCUMENT: plantard_32bit.pdf PAGE: 4/15

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY 4
Algorithm 2 Signed Plantard multiplication [20]
Input: Two signed integers a,b ∈ [−q2α,q2α],q <
2l−α−1,q′
= q−1 mod±22l
Output: r= ab(−2−2l) mod±q where r∈[−
q+1
q
2 )
1: r= [[abq′]2l]l + 2α q
l
2: return r
2 ,
Barrett arithmetic. As suggested in [9], when Montgomery-
like algorithms are used in the modular multiplication by the
twiddle factor in NTT, we can store the twiddle factor in
the Montgomery or Plantard domain, namely multiplying the
twiddle factor with 2l or 22l mod q. In this way, the Mont-
gomery/Plantard multiplication by the twiddle factor could
cancel the special term (2−l or 2−2l) and generate output in
the normal domain.
The biggest difference between these two algorithms is that
the product abis only used once in the Plantard multiplication,
while it is used twice in the Montgomery multiplication. Then,
when operand b is a constant, the Plantard multiplication can
precompute the product of b and q−1 mod 22l. Therefore, if
we can handle the l×2l-bit multiplication a·(bq′) in one
instruction on the target platform, the Plantard multiplication
is one multiplication fewer than the Montgomery and Barrett
arithmetic. Apart from this advantage, Huang et al. [20] further
improved the Plantard arithmetic’s input range and output
range, making it a better modular arithmetic in LBC schemes.
D. Target Platforms: Cortex-M3 and RISC-V
The ARM Cortex-M3 platform we use is Arduino Due
which integrates an Atmel SAM3X8E core [27]. It comprises
96 KiB of RAM and 512 KiB of Flash, and operates at a
maximum frequency of 16 MHz. Similar to Cortex-M4, the
Cortex-M3 platform has 16 32-bit general-purpose registers,
of which fourteen are programmable. However, it doesn’t
provide any floating-point (FP) registers and SIMD extensions.
It should be noted that there are some non-constant-time
instructions like umull, smull, umlal and smlal [28] that we
need to avoid using during the cryptographic implementation,
otherwise it may suffer from timing attacks. The only two “se-
cure” multiplication instructions one can use in this platform
are the mul and mla instructions for computing the low 32
bits of the 64-bit product. The mul instruction costs one cycle
while the mla instruction takes two cycles. Most of the other
instructions are 1-cycle, while the memory access operations
such as ldrh, ldr, ldrd, strh, str and strd are relatively
expensive. Loading or storing half-word/word requires two
cycles, and loading or storing double-word (ldrd/strd) takes
three cycles. Cortex-M3 also provides a useful inline barrel
shifter operation, similar to Cortex-M4, which performs an
additional shift operation before the addition and subtraction
instructions, without additional overhead. For instance, the
instruction (add.w rd, rn, rm, asr #16) first right-shifts the
operand rm by 16 bits, and subsequently, the addition is
performed using the right-shifted result.
RISC-V is an open-source standard Instruction Set Ar-
chitecture (ISA), enabling a new era of processor innova-
tion through open collaboration. Because of its open-source
features, it has attracted huge attention from both research
community and industry. We select two RISC-V platforms as
the benchmark platforms. The first one is the SiFive Freedom
E310 board, which integrates a 32-bit E31 RISC-V core [29].
The RV32IMAC instruction set is instantiated in this core.
This platform is a memory-constrained IoT device with only
16KiB of RAM, making it a suitable platform for measuring
the performance and applicability of LBC schemes on low-
end IoT devices. The second platform is a RISC-V simulator
based on VexRiscv2, as described in pqriscv-vexriscv3 and
used in PQRISC4. The RV32IM instruction set is instantiated
in this simulator. In the following sections, we will denote
the VexRiscv RISC-V simulator as PQRISCV. Both platforms
comprise of 32 32-bit general-purpose registers, of which
thirty are programmable. Similar to the Cortex-M3 platform,
they do not have powerful SIMD extensions. The cycle counts
of some instructions of PQRISCV are not well-specified in the
documents, so we will not discuss them in detail. The cycle
counts mentioned below only refer to the SiFive board. There
are only two multiplication instructions (mul, mulh) that can
be used, and both of them take five cycles on the SiFive board.
Loading or storing one word (lw, sw) requires two cycles
while loading or storing one half-word or byte (lh, lhu, lb,
lu) takes three cycles. Apart from the multiplication, division,
and memory access operations, most of the other instructions
consume one cycle. All instructions are constant-time except
the division.
III. IMPROVEMENTS ON PLANTARD ARITHMETIC
In this section, the detail of the Plantard arithmetic with
enlarged input range will be introduced. And this improved
version is further tailored for Kyber’s modulus.
A. Plantard Arithmetic with Enlarged Input Range
We observe that the signed-version Plantard multiplication
(see Algorithm 2) proposed in [20] accepts inputs a,b in
range [−q2α,q2α]. By replacing q < 2l−α−1 into the range
of a,b, we can see that it approximately covers most of the
l-bit signed integers (−2l−1
,2l−1). Therefore, the Plantard
reduction, which takes a·b as input, can only accept input
in (−22l−2
,22l−2), and it cannot cover all the 2l-bit signed
integers (i.e., [−22l−1
,22l−1)). As mentioned before, the co-
efficients in the NTT/INTT implementation in [20] cannot
overflow 16-bit signed integer due to the use of the SIMD ex-
tension on Cortex-M4. Therefore, the signed-version Plantard
arithmetic proposed in [20] is already quite sufficient for the
implementation on Cortex-M4. However, their implementation
did not fully utilize the large input range, which is larger
than the maximum bound of a 16-bit signed integer, of the
Plantard multiplication by a constant [20, Algorithm 11]. On
the contrary, the implementation on low-end 32-bit platforms
stores each coefficient in a 32-bit register. It enables us to
2https://github.com/SpinalHDL/VexRiscv
3https://github.com/mupq/pqriscv-vexriscv
4https://github.com/mupq/pqriscv
