DOCUMENT: plantard_32bit.pdf PAGE: 7/15

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY 7
Algorithm 5 Efficient Plantard multiplication by a constant
for Kyber on RISC-V
Input: An 32-bit signed integer a ∈[−137q,230q], a pre-
computed 32-bit integer bq′ where b is a constant and
q′
= q−1 mod 232,q2l = q×2l
Output: r= ab(−2−2l) mod±q
1: bq′←bq−1 mod±22l ▷ precomputed
2: mul r,a,bq′ ▷ r←[abq′]2l
3: srai r,r,#16
4: addi r,r,2α ▷ r←([r]l + 2α)
5: mulh r,r,q2l ▷ r←[rq2l]2l
6: return r
Compared to the existing Plantard and Montgomery multi-
plication on RISC-V or Cortex-M3 [20], [32] and [33] that
take five instructions, the proposed implementation is one
multiplication fewer.
B. Plantard reduction
We propose a 4-instruction Plantard reduction for the mod-
ular multiplication of two variables on both architectures,
which is equally efficient as the state-of-the-art Montgomery or
Barrett reduction in [32] and [33]. The proposed instruction se-
quence of the Plantard reduction is similar to Algorithm 4 and
5, except that the 32-bit precomputed constant bq′is replaced
by q−1 mod 22l in the modular multiplication of two variables
or (−22l mod q) ×q−1 mod 22l in the modular reduction of
coefficients. This variant of modular multiplication is used in
the base multiplication of Kyber. Besides, previous implemen-
tations mostly utilize the Barrett reduction to implement the
modular reduction of coefficients. Nevertheless, despite the
same cycle consumption as the Barrett reduction on Cortex-
M3 and RISC-V, we chose to adopt the Plantard reduction for
the sake of consistency.
V. OPTIMIZED KYBER IMPLEMENTATION ON CORTEX-M3
AND RISC-V
Based on the efficient Plantard arithmetic presented in
Section IV, we propose a number of optimizations that are
geared towards improving the efficiency and reducing the
memory consumption of Kyber on Cortex-M3 and RISC-V.
A. Efficient 16-bit NTT/INTT Implementation
This section presents efficient 16-bit NTT/INTT implemen-
tations on Cortex-M3 and RISC-V.
1) Butterfly Unit: To integrate the Plantard arithmetic to the
butterfly unit, we follow the method described in [20] to pre-
compute the 32-bit twiddle factor as ζ = ((ζ·(−22l) mod q)·
q−1) mod±22l. For two signed coefficients a and b, the CT
algorithm computes a′
= a+ bζ and b′
= a−bζ, while the
GS algorithm computes a′
= a + b and b′ = (a−b)·ζ.
We present the efficient implementations of CT algorithm on
Cortex-M3 and RISC-V in Algorithm 6 and 7, respectively.
The instruction sequence for the GS algorithm is similar, hence
we will not discuss it in detail.
Algorithm 6 CT algorithm on Cortex-M3
Input: Two signed integers a,b, the 32-bit twiddle factor ζ
Output: a′
= a+ bζ,b′
= a−bζ
1: mul b,b,ζ
2: add b,2α,b, asr #16
3: mul t,b,q
4: sub b′,a,t, asr #16
5: add a′,a,t, asr #16
6: return a′,b′
We demonstrated that by utilizing the inline barrel shifter
operation on Cortex-M3, one could omit the final shift op-
eration in Algorithm 4 and achieve an efficient 5-instruction
CT algorithm with the Plantard arithmetic. Conversely, the
GS algorithm cannot benefit from the barrel shifter operation
due to the operation difference. Specifically, GS algorithm
requires one more instruction compared to the CT algorithm.
Nevertheless, it is worth highlighting that both CT and GS
algorithms are one instruction fewer than their Montgomery-
based counterparts on Cortex-M3 [33]. Since the CT algorithm
costs one instruction fewer than the GS algorithm, it motivates
us to also adopt it in INTT.
Following similar optimization strategies outlined in [14]
and [26], in order to minimize the side-effect of additional
twists in the last layer of INTT using CT algorithm, light
butterfly was proposed and applied in the first three layers of
INTT. The so-called light butterfly is to reduce the modular
multiplication by the twiddle factor in the CT butterfly, i.e.,
only computing a′
= a + b and b′
= a−b. Additionally,
they suggested that using CT algorithm in INTT could also
help to decrease the number of modular reductions and yield
a superior INTT implementation on Cortex-M4 [14]. After
applying the CT algorithm to INTT of Kyber, we further
validate its extensibility on Cortex-M3. It is worth to note that
we are the first to apply the above improved CT algorithm to
INTT on Cortex-M3.
Algorithm 7 demonstrates the instruction sequence of the
CT algorithm on RISC-V. Unlike the implementation on
Cortex-M3, the GS and CT algorithms are equally efficient
on RISC-V. Initially, we also contemplated the use of CT
algorithm in INTT on RISC-V; however, the results indicated
that the INTT with CT algorithm cannot outperform the
GS one. The crucial reasons for that are two-fold. Firstly,
the use of CT algorithm in INTT results in the doubling
of the twiddle factors, which increases the memory access
overhead. Specifically, in our implementation, the INTT with
CT algorithm consumes 61 additional memory accesses for
the twiddle factors, which reduces its efficiency and warrants
a further 0.5KiB memory to accommodate these extra twiddle
factors. The extra memory cost also increases the difficulty of
deploying Kyber on memory-constrained platforms. Secondly,
the number of modular reduction in INTT with GS algorithm
has been significantly reduced by using Algorithm 3 on RISC-
V (see the better lazy reduction strategy in Section V-A3 for
detailed discussions). Thus, there left only a small space for
further optimization through the utilization of CT algorithm
in INTT.
