DOCUMENT: plantard_32bit.pdf PAGE: 8/15

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY 8
Algorithm 7 CT algorithm on RISC-V
Input: Two signed integers a,b, the 32-bit twiddle factor ζ
Output: a′
= a+ bζ,b′
= a−bζ
1: mul b,b,ζ
2: srai b,b, #16
3: addi b,b,2α
4: mulh t,b,q2l
5: sub b′,a,t
6: add a′,a,t
7: return a′,b′
In summary, the optimal combination of butterfly usage on
Cortex-M3 is to apply CT algorithm on both NTT and INTT.
On the other hand, the most effective pattern on RISC-V is to
use CT algorithm on NTT but GS algorithm on INTT.
2) Layer Merging: Layer merging is an essential optimiza-
tion strategy in NTT/INTT when memory access operations
are costly. This strategy effectively reduces the expensive
memory access by loading multiple coefficients at once and
processing more NTT/INTT layers over these coefficients. The
design of optimal layer merging strategy depends on the num-
ber of available registers on the target platform. For example,
fourteen registers are programming-available on Cortex-M3.
Thus, a maximum of eight coefficients can be loaded at once,
allowing to merge three layers of NTT/INTT on this platform.
The remaining six registers are utilized to store addresses or
execute the modular arithmetic in the butterfly unit. On RISC-
V, an abundance of 30 programming-available registers are
provided with greater flexibility. Therefore, sixteen coefficients
can be loaded at once, allowing to merge four layers of
NTT/INTT at once, and there are still 14 registers left for other
usage. Consequently, the 4-layer merging strategy is better on
RISC-V.
In summary, for the 7-layer NTT/INTT in Kyber, we adopt
the 3+3+1 and 3+1+3 layer merging strategy for NTT and
INTT, respectively, on Cortex-M3. The motivation behind the
choice of the 3+1+3 layer merging strategy instead of 3+3+1
will be discussed in Section V-A3. On the other hand, the 4+3
and 3+4 layer merging strategy are used for NTT and INTT
on RISC-V, respectively.
3) Better Lazy Reduction: The so-called “lazy reduction
strategy” means deferring the modular reduction of coefficients
until the value of coefficients exceed the maximum bound of
the register or the input range of the subsequent operation. The
input range of the modular multiplication by a constant in the
butterfly unit is particularly crucial in facilitating this strategy.
The NTT implementation with CT algorithm algorithm using
Plantard arithmetic only increases the coefficients by 3.5q.
The large input range and small output range of Plantard
arithmetic enables us to eliminate all the modular reductions
of coefficients in NTT on Cortex-M3 and RISC-V. This is a
noteworthy improvement compared to the Montgomery-based
NTT implementation, which requires one modular reduction
for all coefficients. Therefore, the focus of this study is on
the exploration of better lazy reduction strategy for INTT on
Cortex-M3 and RISC-V.
An even better lazy reduction strategy is designed for INTT
in this work, compared to the version on Cortex-M4 in [20].
Two main factors contribute to this new design. Firstly, Huang
et al. [20] utilized the SIMD extension of Cortex-M4 to speed
up NTT/INTT; thus the coefficient in INTT cannot exceed the
bound of a 16-bit signed integer. For Kyber’s modulus q=
3329, the coefficients must stay within [−9.5q,9.5q]. However,
on the low-end 32-bit platforms that lack of SIMD extension,
each coefficient is loaded to a 32-bit register, which has the
potential to temporarily overflow 16-bit signed integer range
before it is stored back to a 16-bit memory. Secondly, the input
range of the Plantard arithmetic is enlarged from [−64q,64q]
in [20, Algorithm 11] to [−137q,230q], which allows for a
“lazier” modular reduction.
a) Input Polynomial of INTT: Before moving to the
detailed strategy, let’s analyze the coefficient size of the input
polynomial of INTT first. It is worth noting that matrix-vector
multiplication and vector inner product are the two operations
that could expand the coefficient size of INTT’s input polyno-
mial. The resulting polynomial of these two operations must
add up k intermediate polynomials, where k equals 2,3,4
for the three Kyber variants, respectively. Abdulrahman et
al. [14] proposed two versions of implementations for these
two operations and its underlying pointwise multiplication: the
stack-version and the speed-version. In this study, we apply the
Plantard arithmetic to both versions of implementations.
• The stack-version process involves reducing each inter-
mediate polynomial and accumulating k reduced polyno-
mials together, which generates an “unreduced” polyno-
mial (i.e., every coefficient of the polynomial is beyond
the output range of modular reduction). When imple-
mented with the Plantard arithmetic, the stack-version
matrix-vector product and vector inner product produce
coefficients within the range (−kq/2,kq/2).
• The speed-version implementation is built on top of
the stack-version implementation. An intermediate 32-
bit array is used to cache the sum of k intermediate
polynomials, and this intermediate result is reduced after
the accumulation process, producing a “reduced” poly-
nomial (i.e., every coefficient is in the output range of
modular reduction). When implemented with the Plantard
arithmetic, the speed-version code generates coefficients
in the range (−q/2,q/2).
b) Better Lazy Reduction on RISC-V: We first introduce
a better lazy reduction strategy for INTT on RISC-V. Since
INTT is computed by using GS algorithm in combination with
the 3+4 layer merging strategy on RISC-V, after the third
layer of INTT, the coefficients have to be stored back to 16-
bit signed integers in memory. Therefore, we need to analyze
the coefficient size to ensure that they can fit in 16-bit signed
integer after the third layer of INTT.
Fig. 1 demonstrates the first 16 coefficients of the first three
layers of a length-128 INTT implemented via GS algorithm.
Since the input coefficients of the stack-version INTT are
within the bound (−kq/2,kq/2), we let the red number
x in Fig. 1 equal to kq/2, which is the largest absolute
value of the input range. After three layers of GS butterflies
computation, the first 2 coefficients (out of 16 coefficients)
are expanded up to 8x, namely 4kq. In the case of Kyber512
