DOCUMENT: plantard_32bit.pdf PAGE: 11/15

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY term has already existed in the original polynomial vector ˆs. In
this work, we show that the extra memory space is unnecessary
on low-end 32-bit platforms. We propose using poly half
and polyvec half to cacheˆ
s2i+1ζ2br7 (i)+1 only, where each
poly half consists of 128 instead of 256 coefficients and each
polyvec half consists of k poly half. Our approach results
in a halving of stack usage to cache the temporary terms.
Specifically, by using the polyvec half to cache all terms
ˆ
s2i+1ζ2br7 (i)+1 for one secret vector in the speed-version code,
we could reduce the stack usage by 0.5KiB, 0.75KiB, and
1KiB, in three PKC protocols of Kyber512, Kyber768, and
Kyber1024, respectively.
In addition to the memory optimized technique described
above, we propose another approach to reduce the memory
usage for the better accumulation technique used in the IND-
CPA key generation protocol of Kyber, which utilizes a tem-
porary 32-bit array with 256 entries to store the intermediate
accumulation result of the vector inner product. We observe
that in the IND-CPA key generation protocol, the memory
space reserved for the 32-bit temporary array and polynomial
pkp can be merged, where pkp is a temporary polynomial in
the key generation protocol. We introduce a new data structure
called poly double that can hold 512 16-bit coefficients,
which has the same memory footprint as the temporary 32-bit
array. By leveraging data type conversion, we can re-purpose
the memory allocated for the temporary array to store pkp,
reducing its memory usage by 0.5KiB in the key generation
protocol.
Together, these two memory optimizations improve the
feasibility of the speed-version implementation on memory-
constrained IoT devices significantly, such as the selected
16KiB SiFive board. Notably, while the second approach only
applies to the KEM key generation protocol, the first technique
can be applied to all three KEM protocols of Kyber.
C. Extensibility and Security
Although this paper primarily focuses on the efficient
implementations of Kyber on Cortex-M3 and RISC-V, the
Plantard arithmetic with enlarged input range, as described in
Algorithm 3, is not limited to Kyber. The proposed Plantard
arithmetic can be applied to other LBC schemes with 16-
bit odd moduli, e.g., NewHope [9] and NTTRU [34] etc..
The optimization techniques proposed in Section IV provide
several solutions for the efficient implementation of Plantard
arithmetic. These techniques are able to extend to other 32-
bit platforms that share similar instruction sets, making it
possible to supersede the Montgomery and Barrett arithmetic
by the Plantard arithmetic and further speed up LBC. Besides,
most of the optimizations for NTT/INTT can be extended
to other LBC schemes with 16-bit NTT, with the exception
that the lazy reduction strategy may need to redesign. This
is because the Plantard arithmetic may have different input
ranges for different moduli used in other LBC schemes. Last
but not least, the memory optimizations proposed for the
speed-version Kyber implementation can also be extended to
other low-end IoT platforms with similar memory constraints.
However, the proposed optimizations cannot be directly
applied to the 32-bit NTT in Dilithium on 32-bit platforms.
11
The Plantard arithmetic for 32-bit modulus would require
computing 32×64-bit multiplication, which must be separately
computed with at least two instructions on 32-bit platforms and
thus wipe out the gains of the Plantard arithmetic. However,
we believe our optimizations could be applied to Dilithium on
64-bit platforms that can efficiently implement the 32 ×64-
bit multiplication. Moreover, recent research [14] shows that
the computation of csi in Dilithium can be implemented with
16-bit NTT. Therefore, the proposed optimizations are also
applicable to these operations on 32-bit platforms.
In order to resist side-channel attack, our implementation
avoids the use of non-constant-time instructions on Cortex-M3.
Additionally, we ensure that all the secret-related operations in
our implementation are constant-time on both platforms, and
our implementation does not leak more sensitive information
compared to the reference work, making it secure against
simple power analysis and timing side-channel attacks.
VI. RESULTS AND COMPARISONS
This section presents and discusses the experimental results
of Kyber on the ARM Cortex-M3 and two RISC-V platforms:
the SiFive Freedom E310 board and PQRISCV. All the results
on the same platform are obtained under the same environ-
ment.
A. Experimental Setup
Cortex-M3 setup: For the Cortex-M3 platform, we utilize
the ATSAM3X8E microcontroller on an Arduino Due board
[27] as the testbed. Our implementation is based on the PQM3
repository [33], and the GCC v10.2.1 is used to compile the
code. We leverage the hardware random number generators
available on Cortex-M3 to obtain the necessary random num-
bers for the Kyber implementation. Stack usage is measured
following the methodology outlined in [33]. Additionally,
SHA3 and SHAKE are implemented using the optimized as-
sembly Keccak permutation token from the eXtended Keccak
Code Package (XKCP)5
.
RISC-V setup: The realistic RISC-V platform we choose
is the SiFive Freedom E310 board, which is equipped with
a 32-bit E31 RISC-V core [29]. Due to its limited 16KiB
memory, a direct deployment of Kyber on this platform is in-
feasible. Hence, in order to provide detailed comparisons with
the existing Kyber implementation on RISC-V, we also present
experimental results obtained from the RISC-V simulator used
in PQRISCV [35], which uses a RISC-V CPU implemented
in pqriscv-vexriscv6 as the PQC benchmarking platform. The
GCC compiler we used for RISC-V is the RISC-V GNU
v10.2.0. Since both of the RISC-V platforms do not have
hardware random number generators, we reuse the function
in PQRISCV [35] to generate the random numbers in Kyber.
Furthermore, for the implementation of SHA3 and SHAKE,
we rely on the optimized Keccak permutation provided by Ko
[36] in PQRISCV.
To support the Kyber-90s variants, we adopt the optimized
AES implementation presented in [37] on Cortex-M3 and
5https://github.com/XKCP/XKCP
6https://github.com/mupq/pqriscv-vexriscv
