DOCUMENT: Neon_NTT.pdf PAGE: 1/38

Neon NTT: Faster Dilithium, Kyber, and Saber
on Cortex-A72 and Apple M1
Hanno Becker1, Vincent Hwang2,3, Matthias J. Kannwischer3, Bo-Yin Yang3
and Shang-Yi Yang4
1 Arm Research, Cambridge, UK
hanno.becker@arm.com
2 National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
vincentvbh7@gmail.com
3 Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
matthias@kannwischer.eu, by@crypto.tw
4 Chelpis Co. Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan
nick.yang@chelpis.com
Abstract. We present new speed records on the Armv8-A architecture for the lattice-
based schemes Dilithium, Kyber, and Saber. The core novelty in this paper is
the combination of Montgomery multiplication and Barrett reduction resulting in
“Barrett multiplication” which allows particularly eﬃcient modular one-known-factor
multiplication using the Armv8-A Neon vector instructions. These novel techniques
combinedwithfasttwo-unknown-factorMontgomerymultiplication, Barrettreduction
sequences, and interleaved multi-stage butterflies result in significantly faster code.
We also introduce “asymmetric multiplication” which is an improved technique for
caching the results of the incomplete NTT, used e.g. for matrix-to-vector polynomial
multiplication. Our implementations target the Arm Cortex-A72 CPU, on which our
speed is 1.7× that of the state-of-the-art matrix-to-vector polynomial multiplication
in kyber768 [Nguyen–Gaj 2021]. For Saber, NTTs are far superior to Toom–Cook
multiplication on the Armv8-A architecture, outrunning the matrix-to-vector polyno-
mial multiplication by 2.0×. On the Apple M1, our matrix-vector products run 2.1×
and 1.9× faster for Kyber and Saber respectively.
Keywords: NIST PQC· Armv8-A· Neon· Dilithium· Kyber· Saber
1 Introduction
When large quantum computers arrive, Shor’s algorithm [Sho97] will break almost all
currently deployed public-key cryptography by solving the integer factorization and the
discrete logarithms problems. Preparing for this, the U.S. National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) has initiated a process to select new cryptosystems that withstand
the increased capabilities of quantum computers – an area known as Post-Quantum
Cryptography (PQC). This process naturally divides into categories of digital signatures
and key encapsulation mechanisms (KEMs) [NIS] and is currently in the third round,
where 7 finalists and 8 alternate candidates still compete [AASA+20].
Undoubtedly, the scheme(s) selected at the end of the NIST PQC competition will
become prominent computational workloads of the future. It is therefore important to
understand their performance and resource characteristics on the hugely diverse spectrum
of today’s and upcoming computing platforms, ranging from low-power IoT devices over
desktops to high-end data center cores, to name some. Representative of the former, the
focus of performance analysis of PQC on embedded devices has so far been the Arm®
