DOCUMENT: Neon_NTT.pdf PAGE: 2/38

2 Neon NTT: Faster Dilithium, Kyber, and Saber on Cortex-A72 and Apple M1
Cortex®-M4 CPU. Representative of the latter, the focus of performance analysis on
high-end cores has so far been the AVX2-capable Intel® CPUs Haswell and Skylake.
In this article, we contribute to the performance analysis of prominent PQC candidates
on CPUs implementing the application profile / A-profile of the Arm architecture1 – an
area which, despite its importance, has been comparatively little studied so far. CPUs
implementing the A-profile are ubiquitous, and form a wide spectrum in themselves: It
contains power-eﬃcient CPUs like the Cortex-A7 processor for Linux-capable embedded
IoT devices, cores for the mobile and desktop market like the Cortex-A78 processor, as
well as the Arm® Neoverse™ IP for infrastructure applications, for example, the Arm
Neoverse-based AWS Graviton processors. The Fugaku supercomputer ranked as the
fastest supercomputer in the world in 2020 and 2021 [TOP20, TOP21], is also based on
a core implementing the A-profile. Considering the breadth of use and availability of
A-profile cores in the computing ecosystem, it is therefore important to include them in
the performance evaluation for PQC.
Another axis of distinction within the A-profile is the specific version of the architecture,
suchasArmv7-A,Armv8-A,and, asoflate, Armv9-A,andtheirrespectivesetsofextensions.
In this article, we focus on implementations of PQC on CPUs based on the 64-bit Armv8-A
architecture, leveraging the availability of the Armv8-A version of the Arm® Neon™ Single
Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) instruction set. We do not study implementations based
on the Neon instruction set for Armv7-A or implementations based on the Scalable Vector
Instructions SVE and SVE2 here – this is left for future work.
Returning to the nature of the PQC workloads themselves: Many of the remaining
NISTPQCcandidateschemesarebasedonso-calledstructuredlattices, forwhichthecentral
arithmetic operation is modular polynomial multiplication. A central implementation
technique for such polynomial multiplication is the Number-Theoretic Transform (NTT),
an integer-analog of the Fast Fourier Transform.
In this work, we explore the use of NTTs in implementing the NISTPQC structured
lattice finalist candidates. It has always been a point of interest to determine the realms
of applicability for various advanced multiplication techniques, and in addition to finding
out how well NTTs do, we also compare them to other approaches towards polynomial
multiplication, in particular Toom-Cook/Karatsuba.
Contributions. We exhibit NTT-based implementations of NISTPQC cyclotomic-ring
lattice candidates for CPUs implementing the A-profile of the Arm architecture, leveraging
the Neon vector extension. We optimized mainly for the common Cortex-A72 CPU (used
e.g. in the Raspberry Pi 4), and somewhat for the Apple M1, a high-end desktop core.
We improve on old and discover new implementation techniques, including a Barrett-
reduction based one-known-factor multiplication, which we show to be roughly equivalent
to the Montgomery multiplication technique of [Sei18], but particularly suitable for Neon.
We also introduce the trick of “asymmetric base multiplication” which is applicable
whenever we are caching incomplete NTT results (i.e., Kyber/Saber). Furthermore, we
improve on the best-known two-unknown-factors multiplications and Barrett reduction
sequences in the literature.
Code. Our code is available at https://github.com/neon-ntt/neon-ntt.
Related Work. The most recent work on lattice-based cryptography on the Armv8-A
architecture using the Neon vector extension is by Nguyen and Gaj [NG21] and Sanal
et al. [SKS+21]. NTT is frequently used in the context of polynomial multiplications
1The Arm architecture has three profiles – application (A), real-time (R) and embedded (M) – and
each Arm-based CPU implements a version of one of those profiles. The well-studied Cortex-M4 processor,
for example, belongs to the M-profile.
