DOCUMENT: plantard.pdf PAGE: 1/24

Improved Plantard Arithmetic for Lattice-based
Cryptography
Junhao Huang1, Jipeng Zhang2, Haosong Zhao1, Zhe Liu2,3
,
Ray C. C. Cheung4, Çetin Kaya Koç5,2, Donglong Chen1∗
1 Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research and Application for Data
Science, BNU-HKBU United International College, Zhuhai, China
huangjunhao@uic.edu.cn,zhaohaosonguic@gmail.com,donglongchen@uic.edu.cn
2 Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China jp-zhang@outlook.com
3 Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China zhe.liu@nuaa.edu.cn
4 City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China r.cheung@cityu.edu.hk
5 University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, USA cetinkoc@ucsb.edu
∗ Corresponding Author.
Abstract. This paper presents an improved Plantard’s modular arithmetic (Plantard
arithmetic) tailored for Lattice-Based Cryptography (LBC). Based on the improved
Plantard arithmetic, we present faster implementations of two LBC schemes, Kyber
and NTTRU, running on Cortex-M4. The intrinsic advantage of Plantard arithmetic
is that one multiplication can be saved from the modular multiplication of a constant.
However, theoriginalPlantardarithmeticisnotverypracticalinLBCschemesbecause
of the limitation on the unsigned input range. In this paper, we improve the Plantard
arithmetic and customize it for the existing LBC schemes with theoretical proof.
The improved Plantard arithmetic not only inherits its aforementioned advantage
but also accepts signed inputs, produces signed output, and enlarges its input range
compared with the original design. Moreover, compared with the state-of-the-art
Montgomery arithmetic, the improved Plantard arithmetic has a larger input range
and smaller output range, which allows better lazy reduction strategies during the
NTT/INTTimplementationincurrentLBCschemes. Allthesemeritsmakeitpossible
to replace the Montgomery arithmetic with the improved Plantard arithmetic in LBC
schemes on some platforms. After applying this novel method to Kyber and NTTRU
schemes using 16-bit NTT on Cortex-M4 devices, we show that the proposed design
outperforms the known fastest implementation that uses Montgomery and Barrett
arithmetic. Specifically, compared with the state-of-the-art Kyber implementation,
applyingtheimprovedPlantardarithmeticinKyberresultsinaspeedupof25.02%and
18.56%forNTTandINTT,respectively. Comparedwiththereferenceimplementation
of NTTRU, our NTT and INTT achieve speedup by 83.21% and 78.64%, respectively.
As for the LBC KEM schemes, we set new speed records for Kyber and NTTRU
running on Cortex-M4.
Keywords: Kyber, NTTRU, NTT, Cortex-M4, modular arithmetic, lattice-based
cryptography
1 Introduction
Quantum computers are being developed rapidly. Google [AAB+19] reported their 53-
qubit processor in 2019. Two years later, a Chinese research team [WBC+21] announced
a 66-qubit processor named Zuchongzhi. As is known, Shor’s algorithm can break the
conventional public-key cryptosystems such as RSA and ECC on a sufficiently large
quantum computer. Theoretically, a quantum computer with a few thousand qubits should
