DOCUMENT: plantard.pdf PAGE: 2/24

2 Improved Plantard Arithmetic for Lattice-based Cryptography
break the 2048-bit RSA. However, there are still noise issues not being well understood.
A recent research [GE21] shows that factoring 2048-bit integer in RSA within 8 hours
needs a quantum computer with about 20 million noisy qubits. This implies the current
progress of quantum computers is still far from breaking the currently deployed 2048-bit
RSA or 256-bit ECC. On the other hand, IBM’s roadmap of quantum computers [Hac20]
claims that the number of qubits could be more than doubled per year, making a one
million-qubit machine possible in 2030. The progress of experimental quantum computers
and the surprising developments in the future motivated the cryptographic community to
expedite the study of post-quantum cryptographic algorithms to find suitable alternatives
to the traditional public-key cryptosystems within a decade or less.
In order to promote the development of post-quantum cryptography (PQC), NIST
initiated a standardization project in 2016 to solicit, evaluate, and standardize the post-
quantum cryptographic algorithms. Until now, in the third round of the standardization
process, seven finalists, including four key encapsulation mechanisms (KEM) and three
digital signature algorithms, have been selected. Among these algorithms, three out of the
four KEM finalists (i.e., Kyber [ABD+20], Saber [BMD+20], and NTRU [CDH+20]) are
from lattice-based cryptography (LBC), which indicates that LBC is competitive in terms
of security and implementation efficiency. Evaluating the implementation efficiency of
these candidates is an essential task [AASA+20] not only in the third round of the NIST
standardization project but also in the future commercial deployment.
Among all the operations in LBC, polynomial multiplication is one of the core opera-
tions. Therefore, a relatively low complexity method called Number Theoretic Transform
(NTT) algorithm is widely used to reduce the computational complexity of polynomial
multiplication. During the algorithm design of Kyber and NTTRU, the underlying ring
was properly chosen so that NTT could be used. Modular multiplication is the dominant
operation inside NTT, and the most commonly used modular multiplication algorithms
are Montgomery multiplication [Mon85] and Barrett multiplication [Bar86], which were
originally designed for large-moduli cryptosystems like RSA and ECC. However, the moduli
of the NIST LBC candidates are relatively small, for example, 3329 for Kyber [ABD+20],
12289 for Newhope [ADPS16], and 7681 for NTTRU [LS19]. Therefore, the product of
two polynomial coefficients will extend to at most a word size (32 or 64 bits). Based on
the word size characteristics of these moduli, Thomas Plantard proposed an efficient spe-
cialized word size modular multiplication (Plantard multiplication) [Pla21]. The proposed
Plantard multiplication by a constant introduces an l×2l-bit multiplication operation
(l= 16/32 bit). Plantard suggested that if the l×2l-bit multiplication can be implemented
in one multiplication instruction in the target platform, the Plantard multiplication by a
constant would consume one multiplication fewer than its Montgomery as well as Barrett
counterparts and could be well deployed in LBC schemes.
Motivation. Plantard [Pla21] purely focused on the theoretical design yet leaves much
room for further exploration. The original Plantard arithmetic cannot be efficiently
applied to the existing LBC schemes for the following reasons. First, the original Plantard
multiplication ([Pla21, Algorithm 8]) only presents a solution for multiplying unsigned
integers mod an odd modulus q. Previous literature [Sei18, BKS19, ABCG20, GKS21,
AHKS22] has shown that using unsigned integers in the NTT implementation of LBC
schemes is inefficient because it would introduce an extra addition into each butterfly
unit. Second, the input range of the original Plantard multiplication is mere [0,q], which
requires expensive modular reductions on the polynomial coefficients after each NTT layer.
Previous reports have offered solutions to these problems by adapting the Montgomery
arithmetic. Alkim et al. [ADPS16] showed that the large input range of Montgomery
reduction enables the so-called lazy reduction technique to reduce the use of expensive
modular reduction. Seiler et al. [Sei18] proposed a signed version of Montgomery reduction
