DOCUMENT: plantard.pdf PAGE: 3/24

Junhao Huang et al. 3
on the Intel platform, which further speeds up the butterfly units. The follow-up work
[BKS19, ABCG20, GKS21] further extended the signed Montgomery reduction to the
Cortex-M4 platform. The fastest Montgomery reduction for 16-/32-bit moduli [ABCG20,
GKS21, AHKS22] only consumes 2 cycles on the Cortex-M4 platform. Even though
Montgomery arithmetic could provide an efficient solution to most of the LBC schemes,
this paper shows that Plantard arithmetic could be a potential alternative to Montgomery
arithmetic in the LBC schemes with l-bit odd modulus, given that the target platform
could implement the l×2l-bit multiplication in one multiplication.
Our Contributions. This paper aims to improve, customize, and implement the Plantard
arithmetic for the existing LBC schemes. Our contributions are threefold:
• First, we present an improved Plantard arithmetic for signed integers with its
correctness proof. The proposed method is inspired by the observation that the
moduli in the existing LBC schemes are normally several times smaller than the
modulus constraint in the original Plantard arithmetic.
• Second, we detail the advantages of the improved Plantard arithmetic over its original
version, Montgomery and Barrett arithmetic. With some tweaks over the original
algorithm, the improved Plantard arithmetic not only supports signed integers but
also extends its input range and narrows down its output range, thus enabling better
lazy reduction strategies in NTT/INTT. Besides, it inherits the advantage of the
Plantard multiplication, i.e., saving one multiplication when one of the two operands
is a constant. All these merits make it possible to replace the Montgomery and
Barrett arithmetic with the improved Plantard arithmetic in LBC schemes on some
platforms.
• Third, we present an efficient implementation of the improved Plantard arithmetic
for 16-bit odd moduli using the smulw{b,t} instruction to perform the 16 ×32-bit
multiplication on Cortex-M4. By replacing the state-of-the-art Montgomery and
Barrett arithmetic with the improved Plantard arithmetic, we demonstrate that the
proposed design enables more efficient polynomial arithmetic, namely NTT, INTT,
and modular reduction, resulting in faster Kyber and NTTRU implementations on
Cortex-M4. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first assembly implementation
of NTTRU on Cortex-M4, and we set new speed records for Kyber and NTTRU.
It should be noted that our optimizations for Kyber and NTTRU are not limited to
Cortex-M4 and can be extended to Cortex-M7 as well as some 32-bit microcontrollers
without SIMD extensions, e.g., the SiFive Freedom E310 with a 32-bit E31 RISC-V core
[SiF] (see Subsection 4.3 for more details about the extensibility of our optimizations).
Code. The implementations of Kyber and NTTRU are open source and available at
https://github.com/UIC-ESLAS/ImprovedPlantardArithmetic.
2 Preliminaries
In this section, we first briefly introduce the variants of the Learning With Errors (LWE)
problem. Then, the algorithms of Kyber and NTTRU are described. Finally, the details of
the NTT and related modular arithmetic are given.
The Learning With Errors (LWE) problem is systematically defined by Regev in
[Reg05] for constructing public-key cryptosystems under the quantum random oracle
model. Lyubashevsky et al. [LPR10] introduced a Ring algebraic structure for LWE,
in effect solving the inefficient problem of LWE-based schemes; this variant is called
