DOCUMENT: plantard.pdf PAGE: 12/24

12 Improved Plantard Arithmetic for Lattice-based Cryptography
q+1
the product of q′and the constant input modulo 22l. Moreover, the Barrett arith-
metic may require an explicit shift operation for a non-word-size offset, which will
further decrease its efficiency. We refer readers to Subsubsection 4.2.4 for a detailed
comparison with the Barrett arithmetic.
• Secondly, theimprovedPlantardmultiplicationextendstheinputrangeto[−q2α,q2α].
We can easily modify this algorithm into the Plantard reduction that accepts input
in [−q222α,q222α] (see Algorithm 13 for details). Compared with the Montgomery
reduction that accepts [−2l−1q,2l−1q], the improved Plantard reduction supports
more redundancy if α is big enough. Therefore, we recommend choosing the largest
αthat satisfies the prerequisites so that the improved algorithm has the largest input
range. The input range of the proposed modular reduction is hard to compare with
the Barrett reduction directly because the input range of the Barrett arithmetic
depends on the parameter setting, i.e., q and γin Algorithm 8. The Barrett reduction
used inside NTT/INTT in Kyber and NTTRU only needs to reduce 16-bit signed
integers. Our modular reduction (see Algorithm 15) can also cover all 16-bit signed
integers and can be a perfect replacement for the Barrett reduction in the NTT/INTT
of these LBC schemes.
• The output range of the improved algorithm is narrowed down to [−
q
2 ,
2 ), which is
the same as the state-of-the-art Barrett reduction presented in [AHKS22, Algorithm
3.2]. Compared with the output range [−q,q] of the Montgomery multiplication,
the improved Plantard multiplication halves or slows down the growing rate of the
coefficient size in the NTT with CT butterflies or the INTT with GS butterflies,
respectively. Together with the larger input range, the improved Plantard multiplica-
tion enables better lazy reduction strategies in NTT/INTT (see Subsubsection 4.2.3).
With all these merits over the Montgomery and Barrett arithmetic, the improved
Plantard arithmetic has two weak spots. If we precompute the product of q′and the twiddle
factors modulo 22l in NTT, the size of the precomputed intermediate result will be doubled.
First, it needs to deal with the l×2l-bit multiplication, which may not be applicable
to architectures like AVX2 and NEON. However, we show that this method is perfectly
suitable for Cortex-M4, Cortex-M7 and some 32-bit microcontrollers (see Subsection 4.3).
Second, the double-size twiddle factors are normally placed into the Read-Only Memory
(ROM) instead of the Random Access Memory (RAM). Consequently, the side effect is
that we need more cycles to load them into registers (see Subsubsection 4.2.2 for detailed
discussion); this will not affect the stack usage. Nevertheless, arithmetic and experimental
analyses show that the overall cycle reduction obtained from the aforementioned merits
could offset the cycle increment introduced by twiddle factor loading.
4 Optimized Implementation on Cortex-M4
In this section, we present an efficient implementation of the improved Plantard arithmetic
for 16-bit word-size moduli on Cortex-M4 and apply it to Kyber and NTTRU. Then,
the extensibility of the improved Plantard arithmetic on other platforms and schemes is
discussed. Note that the Plantard arithmetic mentioned below refers to the improved
Plantard arithmetic presented in Section 3.
4.1 Efficient Plantard Arithmetic for 16-bit Modulus
Before moving forward into the implementation details, it is assumed that there exists a
small integer α≥0 such that the prerequisite (q <2l−α−1) mentioned in Theorem 1 is
established (which is the case for most of the LBC schemes, including Kyber and NTTRU).
