DOCUMENT: plantard.pdf PAGE: 15/24

Junhao Huang et al. 15
factors in the Montgomery domain when using Montgomery arithmetic. Similar to
Montgomery arithmetic, Plantard arithmetic also produces a result in a special domain,
namely c(−2−2l) mod±q. Therefore, to integrate Plantard arithmetic into the butterfly
unit, we also store the twiddle factors in the “Plantard” domain by multiplying each
twiddle factor with a constant−22lmod q. Besides, to utilize the improved Plantard
multiplication by a constant (Algorithm 11) in the butterfly unit, one also needs to
multiply q−1 mod±22l by the twiddle factor ζ in the “Plantard” domain modulo 22l
,
namely ζ = (ζ·(−22l) mod q)·q−1 mod±22l. Note that this precomputation would result
in a 2l-bit twiddle factor. Although it would introduce extra cycles for data loading, this
overhead can be offset by the improvements brought by the improved Plantard arithmetic.
Algorithm 14 illustrates the detailed instruction sequence of the double CT butterfly,
whichcomputesa= (atop+btopζ)||(abottom+bbottomζ),b= (atop−btopζ)||(abottom−bbottomζ)
over packed arguments a,b. Thanks to the SIMD instruction smulw{b,t}, one can pack
two 16-bit coefficients into one 32-bit register b. Then, one can perform the Plantard
multiplication (Algorithm 11) by a proper twiddle factor ζ over the top and bottom half
of b using the smulwt and smulwb instructions, respectively. The follow-up instruction
sequenceisthesameasthepreviouswork[ABCG20]. Insummary, weobtaina7-instruction
double CT butterfly for packed arguments, which reduces 2 instructions compared with
the one that uses Montgomery multiplication. Similarly, we can also obtain a 7-instruction
double GS butterfly for INTT.
4.2.2 Layer Merging
As stated in Subsubsection 4.2.1, using the improved Plantard arithmetic will double
the size of the twiddle factors. It would bring extra load instructions to load the 32-bit
twiddle factors compared with the original 16-bit version. However, the improvements
brought by the improved Plantard arithmetic can easily bury this overhead thanks to
the layer merging techniques. There are two efficient layer merging strategies for Kyber
on Cortex-M4, which are presented in [ABCG20] and [AHKS22], respectively. The layer
merging strategy in [ABCG20] is the 3-layer merging strategy (3-3-1), while [AHKS22]
adopts the 4-layer merging strategy (4-3). Since the first 4-layer NTT re-uses the same 15
twiddle factors multiple times, [AHKS22] proposes to cache the 15 16-bit twiddle factors
into 8 FP registers and replace the memory access instruction with the cheaper vmov
instruction. Apart from using the FP registers and the vmov instruction, the 4-layer
merging strategy is actually built upon the 3-layer merging strategy in [ABCG20].
The 3-layer merging strategy in [ABCG20] allows us to compute 8 butterflies at the cost
of loading 1, 2, or 4 32-bit twiddle factor(s) in each layer. Note that loading 2 consecutive
32-bit twiddle factors can be achieved by a 3-cycle ldrd instruction on Cortex-M4, which is
merely 1-cycle slower than the original ldr instruction to load 2 consecutive 16-bit twiddle
factors. We rearrange the twiddle factors in the same order as they are used so that one
can use ldrd to load 2 consecutive 32-bit twiddle factors. Overall, by integrating the
Plantard arithmetic into the 3-layer merging strategy, one could reduce 8 cycles (reduce 1
cycle for each butterfly) with 0, 1, or 2 extra cycle(s) to load the 32-bit twiddle factors
in each layer. For the 8 butterflies that only require 1 twiddle factor, one could reduce 8
cycles at no extra cost since ldr has the same cost as ldrh.
As for the 4-layer merging strategy, due to the double size of the twiddle factors, one
needs to load 15 twiddle factors into 15 FP registers with the vldm instruction. Compared
with 8 FP registers in the original design, our design consumes 7 extra cycles. Besides,
during each iteration of the first 4 layers, one needs 7 extra vmov instructions to retrieve
the twiddle factors from the FP registers to general registers. This extra cycle consumption
can be totally covered by the cycle reduction brought by the improved Plantard arithmetic.
In order to reveal the actual effect brought by the improved modular arithmetic in our
implementation, both 3-layer and 4-layer merging strategies are used in Kyber, while the
