DOCUMENT: plantard.pdf PAGE: 16/24

16 Improved Plantard Arithmetic for Lattice-based Cryptography
better 4-layer merging strategy is adopted in NTTRU. Besides, for the implementation
of NTTRU and Kyber with the 3-layer merging strategy, we use CT butterflies in NTT
and GS butterflies in INTT. As for the Kyber implementation with the 4-layer merging
strategy, the CT butterflies are adopted in both NTT and INTT, similar to [AHKS22].
4.2.3 Lazy Reduction
To better illustrate the improvements the improved Plantard arithmetic brings to both
CT and GS butterflies, we only discuss the lazy reduction strategies for the NTT with
CT butterflies and INTT with GS butterflies here. When Montgomery arithmetic is
applied to NTT and INTT, all of the coefficients will grow by q after each layer of NTT,
while half of the coefficients will double after each layer of INTT. The well-known lazy
reduction technique can minimize the number of modular reductions in NTT/INTT, which
is mainly determined by the input range of the modular multiplication. Compared with
the Montgomery arithmetic, the output range of the improved Plantard arithmetic is
halved, while the input range of the improved Plantard reduction (Algorithm 13) is about
2α times larger than Montgomery reduction (i.e., the reduction version Algorithm 12).
Therefore, applying the improved Plantard arithmetic in NTT/INTT can halve/decrease
the growing rate of coefficients compared with the one that uses Montgomery arithmetic,
thus enabling better lazy reduction strategies.
CT Butterfly. Specifically, for the modulus q = 3329 (9q < 2l−1 < 10q) in Kyber,
the forward NTT has 7 layers of butterflies. Therefore, the 7 layers of butterflies that
use Montgomery multiplication will expand all of the 256 coefficients by 7q. Therefore,
at least one modular reduction is required to reduce the 256 coefficients to perform the
follow-up base multiplication. On the contrary, when applying Plantard multiplication,
the coefficients only grow by 3.5q in 7 layers. Since the inputs of NTT are always smaller
than q, 4.5q lies in the modular multiplication input range [−q2α,q2α] of Kyber (α=3 for
Kyber). Therefore, the output coefficients of NTT with Plantard multiplication can be
directly used in the base multiplication without modular reduction.
It should be noted that the coefficient expansion would have a bigger effect on schemes
with bigger modulus like NewHope [ADPS16] and NTTRU [LS19]. As for the modulus
q = 7681 (4q < 2l−1 < 5q) in NTTRU, all of the 768 coefficients need one modular
reduction after every three layers of butterflies when Montgomery multiplication is used.
Since the forward NTT in NTTRU has 8 layers of butterflies, we need two modular
reductions after the third and sixth layers of butterflies. The last two layers of butterflies
will produce coefficients smaller than 3q. These coefficients cannot be directly used in
Montgomery multiplication because (3q)2 = 9q2, which is out of the input range of q2l−1
.
Therefore, the forward NTT implemented with Montgomery arithmetic in NTTRU needs
three modular reductions for 768 coefficients. However, when using the improved Plantard
multiplication in NTTRU, we only need one modular reduction for 768 coefficients after
the seventh-layer butterflies. The final layer of butterflies only expand the coefficients up to
1q, which lies in the input range of [−q2α,q2α] (α= 2 for NTTRU), and these coefficients
can be directly used in the base multiplication. In sum, two modular reductions for 768
coefficients are saved compared with the implementation that uses Montgomery arithmetic,
which fully illustrates the benefits of a larger input range and smaller output range of our
method.
GS Butterfly. As for the INTT with GS butterflies in Kyber, the advantages of applying
the Plantard arithmetic are twofold. First, the maximum input value of INTT is halved
after the matrix-vector multiplication (i.e., Step 6 of Algorithm 2). If one uses Montgomery
arithmetic in the matrix-vector multiplication, the coefficients produced in this process
would be smaller than 2q,3q, and 4qfor Kyber512, Kyber768, and Kyber1024, respectively.
Therefore, one modular reduction of coefficients is required after the first and second layers
of butterflies in INTT for Kyber768/Kyber1024 and Kyber512, respectively. In our case,
