DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 1/46

Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance
assembly via constraint solving
Amin Abdulrahman1,2, Hanno Becker3
,
Matthias J. Kannwischer4 and Fabien Klein5
1 Ruhr University Bochum, Germany
amin.abdulrahman@mpi-sp.org
2 Max Planck Institute for Security and Privacy, Bochum, Germany
3 Automated Reasoning Group, Amazon Web Services, Cambridge, United Kingdom‡
beckphan@amazon.co.uk
4 Quantum Safe Migration Center, Chelpis Quantum Tech, Taipei, Taiwan§
matthias@kannwischer.eu
5 Arm Limited
fabien.klein@arm.com
Abstract. Handwritten assembly is a widely used tool in the development of high-
performance cryptography: By providing full control over instruction selection,
instruction scheduling, and register allocation, highest performance can be unlocked.
On the flip side, developing handwritten assembly is not only time-consuming, but
the artifacts produced also tend to be difficult to review and maintain – threatening
their suitability for use in practice.
In this work, we present SLOTHY (Super (Lazy) Optimization of Tricky Handwritten
assemblY), a framework for the automated superoptimization of assembly with
respect to instruction scheduling, register allocation, and loop optimization (software
pipelining): With SLOTHY, the developer controls and focuses on algorithm and
instruction selection, providing a readable “base” implementation in assembly, while
SLOTHY automatically finds optimal and traceable instruction scheduling and register
allocation strategies with respect to a model of the target (micro)architecture.
We demonstrate the flexibility of SLOTHY by instantiating it with models of the
Cortex-M55, Cortex-M85, Cortex-A55 and Cortex-A72 microarchitectures, imple-
menting the Armv8.1-M+Helium and AArch64+Neon architectures. We use the
resulting tools to optimize three workloads: First, for Cortex-M55 and Cortex-M85, a
radix-4 complex Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) in fixed-point and floating-point arith-
metic, fundamental in Digital Signal Processing. Second, on Cortex-M55, Cortex-M85,
Cortex-A55 and Cortex-A72, the instances of the Number Theoretic Transform (NTT)
underlying CRYSTALS-Kyber and CRYSTALS-Dilithium, two recently announced
winners of the NIST Post-Quantum Cryptography standardization project. Third,
for Cortex-A55, the scalar multiplication for the elliptic curve key exchange X25519.
The SLOTHY-optimized code matches or beats the performance of prior art in all
cases, while maintaining compactness and readability.
Keywords: Superoptimization· ConstraintSolving· Cryptography· Post-Quantum
Cryptography· Armv8.1-M· AArch64· Helium· Neon· Kyber· Dilithium·
X25519· Fast Fourier Transform· FFT· Number Theoretic Transform· NTT·
Software Pipelining· Google OR-Tools
‡This work was done while the author was at Arm Research.
§This work was done while the author was at Academia Sinica.
