DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 2/46

2 Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance assembly via constraint solving
1 Introduction
Software optimization involves trade-offs, some affecting traditional metrics such as perfor-
mance, code-size, and memory usage, others affecting softer metrics such as readability,
maintainability, and verifiability. While the initial study of algorithms and implementa-
tions for nascent computational problems typically focuses on the traditional metrics, it
is the softer metrics that are equally important as implementations leave their home of
research and step into the “real world”. Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) is a timely
example: Implementations of PQC have been studied extensively in the past years for
their core performance metrics. However, now that draft standards for the first winners
of NIST’s Post-Quantum Cryptography standardization project [NIS16] are available
[NIS23b, NIS23a, NIS23c] and the use of PQC becomes increasingly urgent, the soft met-
rics become central: Are implementations understandable, maintainable, verifiable? This
work aims to facilitate the transition of high-performance PQC implementations from
research into practice.
At the architectural and microarchitectural level, implementors often face the choice
between handwritten assembly and compiled languages. This choice is a trade-off: While
handwritten assembly typically yields highest performance, it also tends to be time-
consuming to develop and difficult to read and maintain. Conversely, writing software in
compiled languages, such as C, offers fast development times as well as clean and portable
code, but performance is generally worse than that of handwritten assembly. The reason is
simple: The use of compiled languages leaves a number of tasks to the compiler which are
too complex for compilers to solve optimally, especially within their limited time budget.
Solving those complex tasks manually is thus an opportunity for performance, but also a
risk for laborious development with inscrutable results.
Among the tasks taken care of by compilers are the following: First, identifying how
the semantics of terms in the source language can be expressed through the instructions
of the target machine language. For example, a C developer may simply write a%b for
the reduction of a modulo b, but finding efficient algorithms to compute such modular
reductions and expressing them in terms of the target architecture, are non-trivial questions
left to the compiler (developers) this way. Second, once this instruction selection step is
done, the tasks of register allocation and instruction scheduling. Continuing the example of
modular reduction: An implementation of modular reduction via (say) Barrett reduction
might have been provided for the target architecture, but if numerous such reductions
need to be orchestrated alongside other code, finding appropriate instructions scheduling
and register allocation strategies is a difficult problem on its own.
Two popular approaches addressing the dilemma of choosing between handwritten
assembly and compiled languages are the following: First, inline assembly allows devel-
opers to force the use of a particular instruction sequence while leaving the allocation
of input/output registers to the compiler. Second, extensions like the Arm C Language
Extension (ACLE) use intrinsincs to expose architectural details such as SIMD instruc-
tions into higher level languages. Both approaches give the programmer some control over
instruction selection, but leave scheduling and/or register allocation to the compiler.
Another approach is to replace or augment off-the-shelf compilation with custom tooling
handling some of instruction selection, instruction scheduling or register allocation, or
related tasks. For example, the qhasm tool [Ber] provides a customizable syntax frontend
for assembly language which leaves control over instruction selection and scheduling in the
hands of the developer, but takes care of register allocation. This allows the developer
to effectively still write assembly, but using symbolic registers and a custom syntax,
thereby achieving artifacts that can be more readable and maintainable than raw assembly.
However, instruction scheduling remaining in the hands of the programmer is, again, both
an opportunity for performance and an impediment to readability and fast development.
In this work, we propose and implement a framework for assembly development in
