DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 3/46

Abdulrahman, Becker, Kannwischer, Klein 3
which the developer stays in full control over instruction selection, while instruction
scheduling, register allocation and also loop optimization (aka software pipelining) are
automated based on models of the underlying architecture and microarchitecture. This way,
manual work is restricted to the most difficult and creative aspect of selecting algorithms
and mapping them to the target architecture. Moreover, since register allocation and
scheduling are automated, the developer can write “clean” code emphasizing the logic
of the computation and using symbolic register names, thereby achieving reviewable
and maintainable code artifacts. Moreover, formal verification can be decomposed into
separately verifying the correctness of the “clean” base code, and the semantics-preservation
of the transformation underlying the optimized scheduling and register allocation. Finally,
since the microarchitectural model is flexible, our approach allows porting code to new
microarchitectures with little effort.
Compared with traditional compilation, our approach is less reliant on fast but ap-
proximative algorithms, and is instead based on superoptimization in search for optimal
solutions: More precisely, we use constraint solving to express the simultaneous optimiza-
tion of register allocation, instruction scheduling, and software pipelining as a constraint
satisfaction problem which is then passed to an external solver.
Contributions. Our contributions are fourfold:
1. We describe SLOTHY (Super (Lazy) Optimization of Tricky Handwritten assemblY),
a (micro)architecture agnostic approach to modelling the simultaneous assembly-level
optimization of register allocation, instruction ordering and software pipelining as a
constraint satisfaction problem.
2. We develop instantiations of SLOTHY for multiple architectures and microarchitec-
tures: (a) A model of the Armv8.1-M+Helium architecture and the Cortex-M55 +
Cortex-M85 microarchitectures implementing it, (b) a model of the AArch64+Neon
architecture and the Cortex-A55 + Cortex-A72 microarchitectures implementing it.
3. We provide an implementation slothy of SLOTHY based on CP-SAT from Google
OR-Tools. As a development tool, slothy converts “clean” and microarchitecture-
agnostic input assembly (using e.g. symbolic registers and macros for readability)
into microarchitecture-specific high-performance assembly. slothy’s output is not
only fast, but also compact and auditable: Loops can be optimized without unrolling,
and we outline how trace annotations can support manual or automatic checks of
the equivalence of input and output, without having to trust SLOTHY itself.
4. We demonstrate the practicality of SLOTHY by optimizing multiple real-world
workloads from Digital Signal Processing and cryptography: (a) on Cortex-M55 and
Cortex-M85, a radix-4 complex Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) in fixed-point and
floating-point arithmetic, (b) on Cortex-M55, Cortex-M85, Cortex-A55 and Cortex-
A72, instances of the Number Theoretic Transform (NTT) underlying the PQ key
encapsulation and signature schemes CRYSTALS-Kyber and CRYSTALS-Dilithium
(to be standardized as ML-KEM and ML-DSA, respectively [NIS23a, NIS23b]), and
(c) on Cortex-A55, the X25519 scalar multiplication. In all cases, slothy transforms
“clean” base implementations into high-performance implementations that match
or outperform prior microarchitecture-specific handwritten assembly, while also
maintaining compactness, auditability, and portability to further microarchitectures.
Future work. There are multiple avenues of future work.
First, we encourage research in the application of SLOTHY to other (micro)architectures
and workloads. In the context of post-quantum cryptography, for example, we do deliber-
ately not build complete implementations of CRYSTALS-Kyber and CRYSTALS-Dilithium.
