DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 4/46

4 Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance assembly via constraint solving
We believe that doing so, under consideration of the numerous implementation techniques
available, would make for an attractive piece of follow-up research. See also Section 6.4.
Second, the soundness & trust story for SLOTHY should be further elaborated: We
argue in Section 5.2 that neither SLOTHY nor slothy need to be trusted to verify
the optimizations they yield, and outline and partially implement a verification strategy.
However, developing that strategy into a full automated verification of the results of
SLOTHY wouldrequirefurtherresearch. Webelievethatthetoolingdevelopedin[BGL+20]
may be adaptable for this purpose.
Third, the integration of SLOTHY with other compilation and/or superoptimization
tooling could be considered: For example, the LLVM infrastructure includes mechanisms
to parse code into computational flow graphs and to encode microarchitectural details —
one could aim to share those with slothy. Going one step further, SLOTHY could be
made an optional optimization pass (enabled, for example, through a suitable #pragma)
during a compiler’s code-generation phase, after instruction selection.
Structure. In Section 3, we discuss various preliminaries on (micro)architecture, compila-
tion and combinatorial optimization. In Section 4, which is the heart of this paper, we
describe our approach SLOTHY to the simultaneous optimization of register allocation, in-
struction scheduling and software pipelining via constraint solving. In Section 6, we discuss
our instantiations of SLOTHY for Cortex-M55, Cortex-M85 (both Armv8.1-M+Helium)
and Cortex-A55 and Cortex-A72 (both AArch64+Neon). Section 7 discusses our CP-SAT-
based implementation of SLOTHY in Python, and illustrates in a toy example how we see
it being used as a development tool. Finally, in Sections 8.1, 8.2, 8.3 and 8.4, we work
through the examples of the Fast Fourier Transform, Number Theoretic Transform and
X25519. We conclude with Section 9 containing some reflections and outlook.
Software. SLOTHY and its instantiations for the aforementioned microarchitectures are
available under MIT license on https://github.com/slothy-optimizer/slothy.
2 Related work
The term superoptimization was introduced in [Mas87] as finding “the shortest program
that computes the same function as the source program by doing an exhaustive search
over all possible programs”. Here, we use it more liberally for any approach to software
optimization that applies a form of deep program search to find programs that improve
upon the results of traditional compilation techniques in terms of size and/or performance.
Synthesizing vs. fixed-instruction superoptimization. Following [Emb15, Section 11],
one can broadly distinguish two separate kinds of superoptimizers: First, synthesizing
superoptimizers (“DAG superoptimizer” in [Emb15]): Those search for optimal (e.g. short)
sequences of assembly expressing a given, typically loop-free, piece of functionality. Second,
fixed-instruction superoptimizers (“lowering superoptimizer” in [Emb15]): Those take the
choice of instructions as a given and search for an optimal scheduling, register allocation
and potentially software pipelining strategy.
Synthesizing superoptimization is a long-standing and active field of research [JNR02,
SCC+17, SSA13, SSA14, SSCA13, BDK+16]. Most recently, [KEG+23] describes the
architecture and implementation for a superoptimizer synthesizing formally verified high-
performance cryptographic code for x86-64 from high-level specifications, and [MMZ+23]
applies reinforcement learning to synthesize a novel high-performance sorting kernel. Fixed-
instruction superoptimization, in turn, has seen a flurry of research primarily in the
1990’s [GN92, WGB94, Alt95, GAG96, Sto96, GW96, AGG98, KL99, KW98, NG07], but
