DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 5/46

Abdulrahman, Becker, Kannwischer, Klein 5
appears somewhat dormant since. Attempting a renaissance, this work firmly belongs to
the realm of fixed-instruction superoptimization.
Reconsidering fixed-instruction superoptimization. There are multiple reasons to re-
consider fixed-instruction superoptimization with this work. First, despite the availability
of highly out-of-order CPUs, the class of microarchitectures that are highly sensitive to
instruction scheduling remains large to-date, encompassing embedded CPUs, in-order
application CPUs, domain-specific accelerators, and (as we show) even some out-of-order
CPUs. For those microarchitectures, fixed-instruction superoptimization is a complex and
impactful problem worth study in its own right.
Second, in the realm of cryptographic engineering – which is the central theme of the
examples studied here – fine-grained control over instructions and instruction patterns
is often necessary to avoid side-channels, and that control is at risk of being lost with
synthesizing superoptimization: E.g., synthesis might undo masking techniques or switch to
instructions with data-dependent timing. SLOTHY, in turn, keeps the developer in control
over the choice of instructions and the constraints by which code may be rearranged.
Third,whenrestrictingtofixed-instructionsuperoptimization,theuseofcomplete search
procedures by way of constraint-solving becomes feasible. Synthesizing superoptimizers, in
turn, typically use incomplete search procedures such as stochastic search [SSA13], genetic
improvement [BGL+20, KEG+23], or machine-learning based synthesis [MMZ+23].
ComparisontoRecentWork. Afairquantitativecomparisonbetweenourfixed-instruction
superoptimization and recent synthesizing superoptimization is not readily possible due
to the different target architectures: While we focus on M- and A-class Arm CPUs here,
[SCC+17, SSA13, BGL+20, KEG+23, MMZ+23] focus on CPUs implementing the x86-64
architecture. It would be interesting to see how synthesizing superoptimization fares in
comparison with SLOTHY when implemented on the same (micro)architecture.
The SLOTHY approach to fixed-instruction superoptimization presently requires a
handwritten model of the target microarchitecture (see Section 6), and thereby differs from
recent synthesizing superoptimizers: E.g., [SCC+17] operates on the level of the LLVM
IR and is not target specific, [SSA13] uses simplified cost-models for rapid evaluation of
candidate optimizations, while [BGL+20, KEG+23] simply run candidate optimizations
on the target. Finally, [MMZ+23] uses a pretrained latency estimator. We believe that a
detailed microarchitectural model — either handwritten, auto-generated, or even learned
— is essential to unlock highest performance for the CPUs considered in this paper.
The development flow advocated for here is close to [BGL+20]: They propose that
developers write a “clean” and an optimized piece of assembly, the former being amenable to
formal verification and the connection between the two verified via “verified transformers”,
leveraging hints from the developer. They also study the use of genetic improvement to
automate optimization, similar to [KEG+23]. While so far specific to x86-64, [BGL+20]
may be adaptable to handle the verification of the transformations found by SLOTHY,
based on the “hints” SLOTHY produces; see Section 5.2.
Fixed-instruction Superoptimization via Constraint-Solving. As mentioned above, the
use of constraint programming (and Integer Linear Programming (ILP) in particular)
for fixed-instruction superoptimization is not new, yet the field appears dormant after
[GN92, WGB94, Alt95, GAG96, Sto96, GW96, AGG98, KL99, KW98, NG07]. The ap-
proach presented here was developed independently, and is, to the best of our knowledge,
significantly different from prior art, as we now explain.
First, our approach to software pipelining rests on the simplifying constraint that only
neighbouring iterations may overlap. In contrast, prior ILP-formulations for software
pipelining, as well as heuristic software pipelining algorithms, typically allow arbitrarily
