DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 6/46

6 Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance assembly via constraint solving
1 // in: src, modulus,
2 // const, const_twisted
3 mul dst, src, const
4 sqrdmulh tmp, src, const_twisted
5 mls dst, tmp, modulus
6 // out: dst
Figure 1: Left: Barrett multiplication [BHK+21] in Neon (lane widths elided). Right: The
underlying computational flow graph.
far iterations to overlap. We have so far found our restriction insignificant in the medium
to large loops that we mainly consider in this paper, while for small loops, modest loop
unrolling (e.g. 2×–4×) increases the effective overlapping distance between iterations.
Second, our modeling approach includes concrete register allocation, that is, solutions
to the constraint model include assignments of registers to instruction arguments. Prior
ILP-formulations, in turn, seem to focus on bounds on the total number of registers used.
Since our target architectures include numerous instruction-specific register constraints
(such as requirements for high/low/distinct/consecutive registers), integrating concrete
register allocation into our model is essential for it to apply to those architectures.
Third, the presentation-style of our constraint model has a very different “flavour”
compared to prior ILP-formulations, as it stays at the level of boolean, integer and interval
variables to reduce the optimization problem at hand to a form of flexible job shop problem.
Declarative vs. Algorithmic optimization. When comparing our work to scheduling
and software pipelining algorithms used by compilers, we emphasize that our approach is
declarative, not algorithmic: By way of the constraint model developed in this work, it is
described what an ideal, optimized code would look like, but not how it can be computed:
It is left to the underlying solver to synthesize a solution or find that there is none. As such,
our approach is fundamentally different from, and not relying on, the various algorithmic
(often heuristic) approaches for scheduling and software pipelining employed by compilers,
such as iterative modulo scheduling or swing modulo scheduling [Rau94, LGAV96].
3 Background
3.1 Compilation terms & techniques
Computational flow graphs. A computational flow graph (CFG) represents a compu-
tation as a labelled directed graph, with nodes corresponding to computation steps and
labelled edges indicating how outputs of one step are used as inputs of others. In this
paper, we exclusively work with CFGs representing computations in assembly, with nodes
corresponding to the instructions of the architecture under consideration. Inputs and
outputs to the entire computation are represented as ’virtual’ instruction nodes without
inputs and outputs, respectively. Figure 1 provides an example. Note that the ordering of
instructions and the use of registers are forgotten when lifting assembly into a CFG. The
reverse process is called lowering and is essential in the code generation phase of compilers.
Phase ordering problem. Lowering a CFG into assembly requires instruction scheduling
and register allocation: Instruction scheduling assigns a linear order to instructions —
