DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 8/46

8 Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance assembly via constraint solving
the availability of an instruction’s arguments, and when ready, issues it to an execution
unit: For example, arithmetic operations are typically sent to an arithmetic logical unit
(ALU). When the instruction’s results are ready, they are written back to the register file
or forwarded to instructions waiting for them.
Execution order. While the journey of an individual instruction through the pipeline is
sequential, the above does not imply an ordering between different instructions with respect
to their time of issuing and execution. Instead, in the language of computational flow
graphs (CFG), we can (conceptually) think of the processor as conducting an ad-hoc lifting
of the instruction stream into a CFG and then dynamically lowering it. The distinction of
in-order vs. out-of-order execution is about how this lowering is determined.
In-order execution. Recall that lowering a CFG requires assigning output registers and
an order to instructions. In-order execution is the simplest possible approach here: The
issue order is the program order, and the physical registers used by an instruction directly
correspond to the architectural registers used in the assembly.
Out-of-order execution. Out-of-order execution lowers the instruction stream’s CFG by
availability: An instruction is issued when arguments and execution unit(s) are available. If
multiple instructions are ready in this sense, typically the earliest instruction with respect
to the original program order is issued. Instructions “waiting” in the CFG are typically
realized via multiple issue queues connecting instructions to the units that will execute
them. An instruction entering an issue queue is called its dispatch stage, and the part of
the pipeline prior to dispatch is called the frontend; it is typically in-order, and in our
mental model corresponds to the dynamic construction of the CFG.
Register renaming. In out-of-order execution, the physical registers used by instructions
are decoupled from the architectural registers used in the original assembly — the latter
are merely dependency labels. Instead, an instruction is assigned “fresh” physical registers
for their outputs at the register renaming stage prior to dispatch. In particular, in an
out-of-order CPU, the left and middle snippets from Listing 1 are identical after register
renaming, enabling an out-of-order execution as in the right snippet. Without register
renaming, out-of-order execution would be severely limited by the resulting register hazards.
3.2.2 M-Profile Vector Extension / Helium
The M-Profile Vector Extension (MVE) is a Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD)
extension that was introduced as part of the Armv8.1-M architecture [Armf]. Its primary
goal is to enable higher performance for signal processing and machine learning applications.
MVE is also referred to as Arm® Helium™ technology, in alignment with the Arm®
Neon™ technology architecture extension for A-profile processors [Arma, Section C.3.5],
or Neon for short. However, despite the similarity in name, Helium is a new ground-up
architecture designed specifically for the tight area/power constraints of the embedded
market. We refer to [BBMK+21, Armg, Arms, Armt] for introductions to Armv8.1-
M+Helium and to the reference manual [Armf] for the details.
What is most important about Helium for the sake of this work is how it carefully
introduces software constraints to lower hardware complexity and thereby retain suitability
for embedded microcontrollers: Most notably, instruction overlapping and the compact
vector register file of 8 ×128-bit vector registers.
First, instruction overlapping allows to achieve up to 2×performance with the same
execution resources compared to non-overlapping, single-issued execution. However, it
requires instructions to be scheduled in such a way that they run on different functional
