DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 10/46

10 Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance assembly via constraint solving
M2
M1
M0
task1,1 task0,2 task2,0 task0,1 task2,1
task1,2
task0,0 task1,0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Figure 3: An instance of the job shop problem. taski,j denotes task j of job i.
3.2.3 AArch64+Neon
We will also be optimizing workloads for the Cortex-A55 and Cortex-A72 CPUs. Those
CPUs belong to the A-profile of the Arm architecture and implement the AArch64 64-
bit execution state, which was introduced in Armv8-A [Armb] and is also used in the
Armv8-R and Armv9-A architectures. AArch64 offers 31 general purpose registers of 64-bit
each, as well as 32 vector registers of 128-bit each, which are operated on by the A64
instruction set including the Neon SIMD vector extension (there are also the SVE and
SVE2 vector extensions operating on vectors of flexible width of up to 2048-bits, but we
will not consider those in this paper). For an introduction to AArch64+Neon, we refer
the reader to [Armp, Armb]. In this paper, we will be optimizing for the Cortex-A55 and
Cortex-A72 CPUs: The Cortex-A55 CPU is an efficiency-focused, in-order implementation
of AArch64+Neon with extensive dual-issuing capabilities, while the Cortex-A72 CPU is a
high performance, out-of-order core — more details will be discussed in Section 6.3.
3.3 Combinatorial optimization
(Flexible) Job shop problem. The job shop problem is a type of scheduling problem: A
number of jobs are given which are to be run on a set of machines. Each job consists of a
series of tasks to be performed in-order, and for each task there are constraints on the
time they take and the machine they must run on. The job shop problem is to find an
assignment of the tasks to the machines which optimizes a given measure [ML93], such as
the total time taken. For the original job shop problem, each task must run on a fixed
machine. For the flexible job shop problem, multiple machines may be suitable for each
task [Pin16]. A visualization of an instance of the job shop problem is given in Figure 3.
Google OR-Tools. Google OR-Tools [PF] is a software for combinatorial optimization,
tailored at solving problems such as vehicle routing, flows, integer and linear programming,
and constraint programming. We find that Google OR-Tools’s CP-SAT is well suited to
our assembly superoptimization problem, in two ways: First, it’s fast. Second, CP-SAT’s
API allows for the specification of a mix of Boolean, integer, and interval variables, and
moreover offers convenient constraints such as non-overlapping for intervals, or mutual
difference for a set of integer variables. However, we expect our modeling approach to
apply to other constraint solvers as well, and encourage further research and comparison.
3.4 The Fourier Transform and its friends
Introduction. The Fourier Transform is a transformation for the decomposition of signals
into frequency components. It has numerous incarnations — such as Fourier series, the
Number Theoretic Transform, and even harmonic analysis on number fields — and a vast
range of applications. Simply put, the importance of the Fourier Transform cannot be
overstated. Here, we are interested in the discrete Fourier Transform over the complex
numbers, which can be viewed as Cn →Cn
,(xi) →( jxiζij
n ) where ζn = exp(2πi/n) is
