DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 12/46

12 Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance assembly via constraint solving
Figure 4: High-level overview of operation of SLOTHY
Figure 4 provides an overview of SLOTHY’s operation: First, the input is parsed and
converted to a computational flow graph. Next, a constraint model is derived as explained
below, and passed to an external solver. Upon success, the (optimal) satisfying assignment
found by the solver is converted back into the output source. This source is then subject
to some post-processing and self-check before being returned to the caller.
SLOTHY’s core does not change instructions except for register renaming. In fact, it
has no knowledge of the semantics of instructions beyond their signatures, that is, the
number and types of inputs, outputs, and input/outputs. It remains the responsibility of
the developer to find ways to express the target computation in terms of the underlying
architecture. This is a core design choice of SLOTHY, and we refer to Section 2 for rationale
in comparison with synthesizing superoptimization.
Finally, SLOTHY has no built-in notion of memory, only registers. First, reasoning
about dynamic memory accesses is not possible without awareness of the precise semantics
of instructions, which is out of scope of SLOTHY by design, as just discussed. Reasoning
about static memory accesses, such as stack spills, is possible by modelling static memory
locations as special “registers” — this will be explained in Section 4.12.
4.2 Overview
The following sections assume that a piece of assembly to be optimized has been provided
and parsed into a computational flow graph (see Section 3). Our goal, then, is to define a
constraint model — that is, a set of integer, boolean, and interval variables together with
a set of conditions imposed upon them — whose set of solutions captures lowerings of
the CFG which are both valid (with respect to the underlying architecture) and of high
performance (with respect to the underlying microarchitecture).
Aspects of the model that pertain to validity are discussed in Sections 4.3 and 4.4, while
Sections 4.6 and 4.8 discuss microarchitectural performance constraints. Section 4.5 dis-
cusses how we incorporate software pipelining into the constraint model, and Sections 4.13,
4.12, 4.7 and 4.14 discuss the modelling of memory, stalls, and optimization objectives.
4.3 Correctness/Architecture constraints: Instruction scheduling
Every instruction I of the input source is assigned an integer variable I.pos defining
where the instruction is placed in the output code. To get a unique program order in the
output, we require {I.pos}I to be mutually distinct. Further, to maintain functional
