DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 13/46

Abdulrahman, Becker, Kannwischer, Klein 13
correctness, consumers must come after producers: If instruction J consumes output O
produced by instruction I — that is, we have an edge I O
−→J in the computational flow
graph — then I.pos <J.pos.
4.4 Correctness/Architecture constraints: Register Allocation
For every instruction I, every output O of I, and every possible register R that I can use
for O, we assign a Boolean variable alloc(I,O,R) indicating whether the instruction I uses
register R for the output O. In analogy with the operation of out-of-order microarchitectures,
we call this process register renaming. In contrast to out-of-order microarchitectures,
however, simultaneous input/output arguments are not subject to register renaming as we
need to preserve the architectural constraint that input and output use the same register.
For those arguments, we use the notation alloc(I,O,R) as a shorthand for alloc(K,U,R),
where K,U is the transitively computed source of O, with U being a pure output (not merely
an input/output). For example, if I is an MLA in a {MUL; MLA; ...; MLA} chain and O
is the accumulator, we would always go back to the initial MUL which made the choice
for which register to use for the accumulator. Finally, note that the input source’s choice
of registers is irrelevant for register renaming — it is only used initially to construct the
computational flow graph from the source.
Multiple constraints need to be satisfied: First, for the uniqueness of register renaming,
we require that for fixed I and O, exactly one Boolean variable in {alloc(I,O,R)}R is
set. Second, for functional correctness, we need to express that in between a register being
produced and consumed, no other instruction uses the register for register renaming. We
model this as a disjointness constraint as follows: First, for any instruction I and any
output or input/output O, we add an interval [I O
−→] starting at I.pos, and bound its
endpoint below by J.pos for any I O
−→J, as well as by I.pos + 1 (in case O has no
consumers). For any choice of output register R, we then add a copy [I O
−→]R of [I O
−→] as
a conditional interval constrained by alloc(I,O,R). Functional correctness then requires
that for any R, the set of conditional intervals {[I O
−→]R}I,O is non-overlapping.
We note that our modelling of register usage is an instance of the flexible job shop
problem, with jobs being instructions and “machines” being registers.
Restricted instructions. Sometimes there are restrictions on the registers that an instruc-
tion can use. Such restrictions often apply to individual arguments (such as requiring even,
odd or low-half registers), but there are also more complex cases: For example, the output
of VCMUL in Helium must not coincide with an input, and the four (!) vector arguments to
the de-interleaving load VLD4x are constrained to the set {Qi,Q(i+1),Q(i+2),Q(i+3)}
for i= 0,1,2,3,4. Individual restrictions on output arguments are straightforwardly added
to the register renaming model by restricting the Boolean variables alloc(I,O,R) accord-
ingly. To model restrictions for multiple register outputs, such as for VLD4x/VST4x, we
introduce Booleans for the different choices, constrain that precisely one is set, and then
add implications to the respective alloc(I,O,R) variables.
Jointly destructive instruction patterns. The Armv8.1-M+Helium and AArch64+Neon
architectures contain instruction patterns where each instruction individually overwrites
onlypartofthedestinationregister, butwherethesequenceasawholeoverwritesitentirely:
In AArch64+Neon, for example, the sequence {INS Vi[0].2D, Xj; INV Vi[1].2D, Xk}
– writing each of the two 64-bit lanes of a vector in succession — is “jointly destructive”
in this sense. In Armv8.1-M+Helium, examples include blocks of VLD4{0,1,2,3} as
well as pairs of VQDMLSDH+VQDMLADHX (jointly performing a complex multiplication
in fixed-point arithmetic). By default, the partially destructive components in a jointly
destructive instruction pattern would be modelled as having their destination register as
