DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 14/46

14 Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance assembly via constraint solving
an input/output argument, thereby creating an unnecessary data dependency between
the instruction pattern and whatever instruction(s) established the previous value of the
destination register(s). This, in turn, limits SLOTHY’s renaming and reordering flexibility.
To address this, SLOTHY allows architecture specifications to modify instructions within
the context of an entire computational flow graph, in particular allowing for the retroactive
detection and reclassification of input/output registers as a pure output registers in jointly
destructive patterns. We leverage this to detect and mark the destination register in
aforementioned patterns as a pure output for the first instruction of the sequence, thereby
allowing to reorder it past previous instructions which write to the same register.
4.5 Loop interleaving aka Software pipelining
Apowerfulfeatureof SLOTHY issoftwarepipelining, thatis, interleavingmultipleiterations
inaloop: Someearlyinstructions, suchasinitialloads, aremovedintothepreviousiteration,
while some late instructions, such as final stores, are deferred to the next iteration. To
avoid having to unroll the entire loop, periodicity of code has to be maintained.
Modeling approach. To begin, for each instruction I we add three Boolean variables
I.pre, I.post and I.core, indicating whether I will be an early/late instruction for
the previous/next iteration, or whether it stays in its original iteration. Precisely one of
{I.pre,I.core,I.post}must be set. For periodicity, we first double the loop body C,
say as C1 and C2, and for an instruction I, we denote I1 and I2 its copies in C1 and C2,
respectively. Note that this duplication is internal only and does not enforce an unrolling
of the loop in the final code. We then relate I1 and I2 through the following periodicity
constraints: First, the choices of I.pre,I.core,I.post and of register allocations
must be the same for C1 and C2: I1.{pre,core,post} ⇔I2.{pre,core,post} and
alloc(I1,O,R) ⇔alloc(I2,O,R) for all I ∈C. Second, “core” instructions are placed
exactly n instructions apart, where n is the length of C: If I.core, then I2.pos=
I1.pos + n. Third, and perhaps somewhat non-canonically, we force early instructions in
C1 to become early instructions for the next iteration C3, and late instructions in C2 to
become late instructions for the previous iteration C0. To achieve that, we constrain that
for I.pre or I.post, we have I2.pos= I1.pos−n— note the sign! — and “cut” the
O
O
constraints derived from I1
−→J1 if I.pre, and those derived from I2
−→J2 if J.post.
Despite those “cuts”, the required constraints are implied by the remaining periodicity
constraints, so long as we impose that for I1.pre and I O
−→J, we have either J.pre
or J.core, and similar for J2.post — without this condition, dependencies could be
entirely and incorrectly removed by never setting I.core (a previous version of SLOTHY
got this wrong). See Figure 5 for an illustration.
Loop boundary. We do not model looping instructions such as counter decrements
and compare+jumps: First, we don’t expect those to have a meaningful impact on the
optimization. Second, onArmv8.1-M+Heliuminparticular, inneriterationsinlowoverhead
loops do execute as if the loop had been unrolled, including the potential for instruction
overlapping. By modelling the last and first instructions of two successive iterations as
adjacent, SLOTHY correctly takes into account the overlapping at the loop boundary.
Preamble and postamble. With software pipelining, the first and last iterations have to
be treated especially: Concretely, a loop in which some instructions are being pulled into
the previous iteration, requires a preamble (also called prologue) consisting of the early
instructions for the first iteration, and a postamble (also called epilogue), consisting of
the non-early instructions of the last iteration. Together, preamble and postamble then
account for one full iteration. If both early and late instructions are used, preamble and
