DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 15/46

Abdulrahman, Becker, Kannwischer, Klein 15
Figure 5: Modelling software pipelining in SLOTHY. Left: Illustration of movement
of early/core/late parts forced by periodicity. Middle/Right: Illustration of lost and
retained dependencies after applying periodicity.
postamble account for two full iterations. In either case, the loop counter needs to be
adjusted accordingly.
A downside of the addition of preamble and postamble is an increased code-size. If
this is problematic, an alternative is to replace the postamble by a full iteration of the
optimized loop body, leaving only the (typically small) preamble as a code-size overhead.
This approach is viable if (a) it is safe to read a fixed amount past the input buffer (e.g.
because it is padded by the caller), and (b) the preamble does not include store instructions
(which can be forced in the SLOTHY model). This approach is used e.g. in [Arme].
4.6 Performance/µArch constraints: Latencies
In this and the following section, we describe how we incorporate performance constraints
into our model. For simplicity, we focus on the case of single-issue, in-order microarchi-
tectures first. Superscalar, in-order microarchitectures are discussed in Section 4.9 below,
and Section 4.10 comments on out-of-order microarchitectures.
In the context of a single-issue, in-order microarchitecture, an ideal, stall-free program
execution would see the execution time difference (in cycles) between two instructions
match their distance in program order. We therefore model latencies by requiring that for
any I O
−→J, we have J.pos ≥I.pos + latency(I O
−→J). Note that this supersedes the
previously introduced functional correctness constraint J.pos ≥I.pos. We also note
that while latency(I O
−→J) often depends on I only, dedicated forwarding paths provide
examples where latency(I O
−→J) may be smaller than the “generic” latency of I: On the
Cortex-M55 CPU, for example, vector multiplication instructions typically have a latency
of 2 cycles, yet sequences VMULx; VSTRx run stall-free.
4.7 Modelling stalls
Performance constraints such as the ones discussed in Section 4.6 may not be satisfiable:
Sometimes, stalls are unavoidable. We model stalls by allowing the set of program
order positions to have gaps, constraining pos to be an injective map {0,...,|code|}→
{0,...,|code|+ maxgaps}rather than a permutation on {0,...,|code|}. The integer
variable maxgaps models the maximum stall “allowance”.
We consider two approaches for minimizing maxgaps: In the first approach, we fix
maxgaps at model construction time. If the resulting model has a solution, we try again
with a smaller value for maxgaps; otherwise, we increase it. Using binary search, a small
number of iterations should reveal the minimum stall allowance. In the second approach,
