DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 16/46

16 Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance assembly via constraint solving
we model maxgaps as an undetermined integer variable that is part of the model, and
mark its minimization as the objective of the underlying solver, if supported.
Our experiments with CP-SAT did not render either approach generally better than
the other: For optimization problems of small or medium complexity, modelling stalls
“internally” in the model appears to work well and lead to the optimal solution faster
than an “external” binary search. For highly complex models, however, adding further
dynamics through the flexible maxgaps could sometimes render the optimization problem
infeasible (that is, we would abort the solver prior to having found a solution), while the
solver could make progress using an “external” binary search.
4.8 Performance/µArch constraints: Instruction Overlapping
Next, we describe how we model functional units and instruction overlapping. As before,
we make the simplifying assumption that the target microarchitecture is single-issue and
in-order, leaving generalizations to Section 4.9 and Section 4.10 below.
Instruction overlapping is modeled by assigning to each instruction I a functional
unit Unit(I) (depending on the target microarchitecture) and a usage time (in cycles)
block(I) capturing for how long I keeps Unit(I) busy. We then demand that for any
fixed functional unit U, the set of intervals {[I.pos,I.pos + block(I)) |Unit(I) = U}I
is non-overlapping. This is a straightforward instance of the job shop problem. If an
instruction may run on multiple functional units, we create Boolean variables tracking
where they actually run, and condition the usage intervals accordingly — that is, we
reduce to a flexible job shop problem. On the Cortex-M55 processor, an example for an
instruction that can run on multiple functional units is the double vector-to-register move
VMOV Ra, Rb, Qn[i], Qn[j].
We highlight that the latency of an instruction may be smaller than its usage time: On
Cortex-M55, for example, many vector instructions (e.g. VADD) occupy their functional
units for 2 cycles, but have 1 cycle latency: This is possible since instruction overlapping
supports data dependencies between the overlapping instructions.
4.9 Superscalar microarchitectures
We have so far described our model for single-issue microarchitectures, using a single integer
variable I.pos for an instruction’s position in program order as well as its (ideal) issue
cycle. For in-order, superscalar microarchitectures, we need two separate, yet closely related
variables: In addition to I.pos, keeping its meaning as the position of I in program order,
we introduce another variable I.cyc for the issue cycle. If N is the maximum number of
instructions issued per cycle, we relate I.pos and I.cyc via I.cyc= ⌊I.pos
N ⌋. Where
such ideal issue-rate cannot be achieved, gaps will be left in the program order assignments,
as described in Section 4.7. In particular, we note that N may be strictly larger than the
issue-rate of the target microarchitecture — the true limit to multi-issuing is enforced
through the configuration of functional units (Section 4.8) and microarchitecture-specific
constraints capturing which instructions may be issued in the same cycle.
4.10 Out-of-order microarchitectures
A typical out-of-order CPU performs register renaming and instruction reordering in
hardware. Those also being the core tasks of SLOTHY, one might wonder whether using
SLOTHY for out-of-order CPUs is fruitful. Somewhat surprisingly, we found (and show
later) that SLOTHY can be useful for some out-of-order CPUs as well, as we explain now.
First, the amount of renaming and reordering a given out-of-order CPU is capable of is
bounded, and a trade-off between performance and hardware cost: The number of physical
registers available for renaming is fixed, as is the width of the reordering window and the
