DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 17/46

Abdulrahman, Becker, Kannwischer, Klein 17
size of the issue queues. We therefore expect that code which is scheduled in consideration
of execution units and latencies, is less likely to hit the limits of the reordering capabilities,
and should thus perform better. Concretely, for example, instructions scheduled in
consideration of the latencies of their source instructions will have a shorter wait in the
issue queue and are therefore less likely to lead to overflows in the latter.
Second, the out-of-order microarchitectures considered here have in-order frontend
which takes care of, among other things, register renaming and instruction dispatch to
issue queues. If the width of this frontend (for the instruction classes under consideration)
is close to the width of the execution backend (for the same class), a constantly high
throughput of the former is required for high utilization of the latter — we will look at
specific examples later. Moreover, the frontend being in-order, its throughput maximization
becomes a scheduling sensitive problem that we can attempt to model in SLOTHY.
4.11 Input and output registers
As mentioned in Section 3.1, we model inputs and outputs as special nodes in the com-
putational flow graph, with input nodes not having any inputs, and output nodes not
having any outputs. Input nodes are added automatically during CFG construction: If an
instruction takes an input argument which has not been written to so far, a new input node
is created and a dependency added between that input node and the current instruction.
Output nodes, in turn, are created on behalf of the user: SLOTHY cannot know which
registers written to by the current program excerpt are actually relevant for the remainder
of the program, and which ones are merely temporaries — it’s for the user to say. For every
output register, we then create an output node dependent on the last instruction that
wrote the register. A noteworthy special case is when a register declared as an ’output’ is
never written to: In this case, a pair of depending input and output nodes is created for
that register, thereby preventing other instructions from using the register.
During the construction of the constraint model, input and output nodes are largely
treated like ordinary instruction nodes: They have a program order position, input and
output dependencies, and contribute to the tracking of register lifetimes and usage. They
are only special in that they have their position fixed to the beginning/end of the program,
and do not enter microarchitectural constraints. This uniformity simplifies the model
significantly — an earlier version of SLOTHY did not use input and output nodes, and
was considerably more complex and error-prone.
4.12 Memory, stack and flags
SLOTHY does not have an in-built notion of memory. In our Armv8.1-M+Helium and
AArch64+Neon models discussed below, store instructions are modelled as having no
output, while load instructions are modelled as having no input except for the address
register. This approach is sound if there are no data dependencies through memory
within the range of a single SLOTHY optimization, which is the case for the common
load-operate-store style loop not relying on the stack as temporary storage.
Where use of the stack is required, the following simple trick can be used: Stack
locations can be modelled as “registers” of a separate register type, which are written
to and read from via virtual instructions that have the same properties as loads/stores
(e.g. in terms of latencies and functional units used). With this approach, which fits into
the existing framework of SLOTHY, data dependencies can be tracked across stack spills
without having to model linear memory. This approach works more generally for any static
use of memory. We use it to model the stack in some of the NTT examples as well as the
X25519 example discussed in Section 8.4.
A similar trick applies to modelling arithmetic flags: Each such flag can be modelled
as a “register” of a dedicated register type, and instructions are marked as depending on
