DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 18/46

18 Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance assembly via constraint solving
or modifying those registers in accordance with their reliance and influence on arithmetic
flags. We use this approach to model flags in the X25519 example below.
4.13 Address offset rewrites
A typical loop will modify the base address for the data to be operated on with each
iteration: For example, in Helium, data might be loaded via VLDR Qin, [Raddr]
for some address register Raddr, and later stored via VSTR Qout, [Raddr], #16,
incrementing the address register for the next iteration. Such patterns make deep soft-
ware pipelining impossible without further modelling of the semantics of the address
increments, as there is a data dependency between the final store of one iteration, incre-
menting the address register, and the initial load for the next iteration. Since SLOTHY
does not know about the semantics of instructions beyond their signature and depen-
dencies, it cannot reorder load and store in this situation. With further semantic knowl-
edge, however, one could of course reorder load and store in such situations, leveraging
commutativity relations such as VSTR Qa, [Rptr], #16; VLDR Vb, [Rptr] ≡
VLDR Qb, [Rptr, #16]; VSTR Qa, [Rptr], #16.
We address this problem as follows: To begin, our existing SLOTHY architecture models
(see Section 6) do not model address increments, but treat address registers for load/store
operations as input-only. This gives SLOTHY the flexibility to freely reorder load/stores
and identify deep software pipelining opportunities, but also constitutes a semantic change
if a load/store with increment is reordered with another load/store from the same base
register. After the optimization, we therefore iterate through pairs of load/stores which
depend on the same address register and have been reordered by SLOTHY, and fix up
their address offsets, leveraging commutativity relations such as the one above. This works
well in the typical case where only one load/store instruction modifies the base register,
and where the offers a flexible immediate offset. For pairs of load/store instruction which
do not have this flexibility, we forbid their reordering in SLOTHY.
We note that manual address increments via add Raddr, Raddr, #16 do currently
still prevent software pipelining in SLOTHY. For loops where such increments can not be
realized as pre/post increments, further work on SLOTHY is needed to optimize them.
4.14 Other objectives
Beyond the minimization of stalls, the following are useful objectives: If software pipelining
is enabled, it is natural to maximize I I.core — that is, to minimize the amount of
interleaving between successive iterations. Second, register usage can be minimized. This
is particularly interesting if the code in question does not fit into the register file, and
“virtual registers” are used to approximate the amount of stack spilling needed.
5 Accuracy, Soundness & Security
5.1 Security
The security of cryptographic code requires dedicated implementation techniques depending
on the threat model. For example, constant-time code should not use any branches, memory
accesses, or variable-time instructions depending on secret data. Other techniques thwart
stronger physical side-channels or fault attacks, such as masking, redundancy, or the
specific ordering of instructions and use of registers to avoid pipeline leakage. Where
automated code synthesis/optimization is used on cryptographic code, it is thus important
to understand if/how it interferes with those techniques.
The implementations studied here are (solely) constant-time, and so are our SLOTHY-
optimizations: Since SLOTHY applies fixed-instruction superoptimization, no branches
