DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 19/46

Abdulrahman, Becker, Kannwischer, Klein 19
are introduced, and memory access patterns as well as the specific use of instructions are
unaltered. Even if an implementation carefully used a generally variable-time instruction
on inputs for which it is known to be constant-time, such as the multiplier on Cortex-M3,
then SLOTHY would not lead to insecure use of this instruction (generally, however, it
is advisable to stick to instructions architecturally guaranteed to have data-independent
timing, e.g. via PSTATE.DIT=1 on Arm architectures).
Next, consider SLOTHY’s compatibility with stronger side-channel countermeasures: To
begin, fixed-instruction superoptimization does not undo masking techniques. Pipeline leak-
age, in turn, is very sensitive to ordering of instructions and the use of registers [MPW21],
the very aspects that SLOTHY can, by default, freely modify. While a detailed study is out
of scope for this work, we believe that SLOTHY can overcome even this hurdle: Namely,
once developers understand the leakage model and derived implementation principles
well enough, they can distill them into SLOTHY constraints and thereby automate their
application. As a toy example, [MPW21, Table 6, row ARMN0] shows that a specific
instance of NXP LPC812M101JDH16 suffers leakage of the Hamming weight of results
of neighbouring EOR+LDR and EOR+STR instructions. This can be encoded in SLOTHY
with little effort via additional constraints J.pos != I.pos + 1, one per pair (I,J)
with (I.type,J.type) ∈{(EOR,LDR),(EOR,STR)}(similar to the modelling ofST-LD-
hazards in Section 6.2). This way, SLOTHY will avoid the leaky pattern. Further, if not all
such pairs require protection, one can add (functionally transparent) instruction wrappers
distinguishing instructions operating on private vs. public data, and limit constraints
accordingly. Finally, we similarly expect SLOTHY to be compatible with Spectre/Meltdown
countermeasures like [SBG+23]: By modelling speculation-stopping instructions such as
fences as reordering barriers in the constraint model of SLOTHY (that is, in the language
of Section 4, constraining that I.pos <J.pos if either I or J is a speculation barrier
and I comes before J in the program input), the mitigations would be upheld.
Overall, we believe that constraint-based fixed-instruction superoptimization is well-
placed to act on cryptographic code of various security levels. We see this as an advantage
oversynthesizingsuperoptimization, forwhichthecompatibilitywithsecureimplementation
techniques appears less clear.
5.2 Soundness
Soundness means that SLOTHY emits code which is functionally equivalent to the original
code. Considering the complexity of the components involved — SLOTHY itself, its
implementation, and the underlying constraint solver — it is important to have an approach
to establishing soundness that does not require trust in either of those components. In this
section, we sketch such an approach, similar to the “verified transformers” of [BGL+20] —
full elaboration and mechanization, however, is left for future work.
The essential idea is that for fixed-instruction optimizations, correctness should be a
consequence of the produced code having a computational flow graph (CFG) isomorphic to
that of the input code. Moreover, such an isomorphism can be checked for efficiently once
provided with the underlying permutation of the optimization, which is part of the solver’s
output. In other words, a CFG-preserving optimization step can be verified independently
of the constraint modelling approach, the implementation, and the underlying solver. Our
SLOTHY implementation performs such a CFG-isomorphism check before emitting the
optimized code, but independent verification tooling should be implemented.
There are some non-trivial details to be considered in the above blueprint, which we
briefly outline. First, the approach assumes that the semantics of some code is a function
of the code’s CFG, which requires the CFG to e.g. at least include reads/writes to memory.
However, as explained in Section 4.12, SLOTHY does not consider dependencies through
memory and elides it from the CFG. This is a valid transformation under the assumption
that the code under consideration does indeed not have dependencies through memory,
