DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 20/46

20 Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance assembly via constraint solving
but nonetheless constitutes a CFG-altering preprocessing prior to the core CFG-preserving
optimization that needs independent verification. A similar comment applies to offset
rewrites (Section 4.13), which too can be viewed as CFG-altering preprocessing steps.
In summary, we believe that SLOTHY-based optimization is amenable to automated
certificate-based verification with SLOTHY and its implementation being untrusted. How-
ever, further work is required to elaborate and implement this verification strategy — our
own implementation currently only performs the core CFG-isomorphism “selfcheck”.
5.3 Performance accuracy
The accuracy of SLOTHY’s performance expectation depends on the fidelity of the given
microarchitectural models. Realistically, those will not be perfectly accurate, but focused
on key aspects such as instruction latencies, throughput, execution units, or forwarding
paths. Unmodeled microarchitectural aspects may therefore still lead to stalls in code
which the (micro)architectural model underlying SLOTHY considers “stall-free”. It is
therefore important to validate the performance of code produced via SLOTHY by running
it on real hardware, and refine the microarchitectural model if necessary.
6 (Micro)Architecture models
Section 4 described our (micro)architecture-agnostic framework SLOTHY for assembly opti-
mization via constraint solving. In this section, we discuss our concrete instantiations: We
modelaspectsoftheCortex-M55andCortex-M85CPUsimplementingArmv8.1-M+Helium,
as well as the Cortex-A55 and Cortex-A72 CPUs implementing AArch64+Neon.
6.1 General approach
Architecture modelling. A SLOTHY architecture model has the following main compo-
nents: First, the set of register types and their associated registers. Register aliases (such as
LR being an alias for X30 in AArch64) may be defined, too. Second, the set of instructions
required for the workload(s) to be optimized. For every instruction, SLOTHY needs to
know about the number of input, output, and input/output registers and their register
type. If there are restrictions on which registers can be used, those must be modelled, too.
Jointly destructive instruction patterns should be modelled for best performance. Finally,
parsers and writers need to be written for the conversion between assembly and CFGs.
Microarchitecture modelling. A SLOTHY microarchitecture model has the following
main components: First, the set of functional units and, for a superscalar architecture, the
issue width. Second, the latencies, throughputs, and functional unit of every instruction.
Third, special cases and target specific restrictions, a typical example being forwarding
paths for common instruction sequences, or issue-slot restrictions.
For in-order microarchitectures, we extract most information from the respective
software optimization guides (SWOGs), with further refinement using our own microbench-
marks. For out-of-order microarchitectures, the modelling process is more heuristic: We
also gather information regarding the throughputs and latencies from the SWOGs, but
experiment with relaxations on the latencies because of out-of-order execution, as well as
the modelling of frontend limitations as outlined in Section 4.10.
Modelling effort. While the development of (micro)architecture models can be time
consuming (see Section 8), it is important to note that it is a one-off effort in the sense
that every aspect of the target (micro)architecture needs to be modelled only once.
