DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 21/46

Abdulrahman, Becker, Kannwischer, Klein 21
Moreover, models can be developed “lazily”, focusing on the instructions required for
specific workload(s) first, and gradually expanding the models over time.
6.2 Armv8.1-M+Helium
For an introduction to Armv8.1-M+Helium, we refer back to Section 3.2.2.
Cortex-M55. The Cortex-M55 SWOG [Armk] provides detailed microarchitectural in-
formation that can be converted into a SLOTHY model. The most important points are
the following: First, Cortex-M55 is a dual-beat implementation of Helium, that is, every
Helium instruction runs for two cycles. In terms of the SLOTHY, this means that the
throughput of Helium instructions is modelled as 1 /2. Second, there are separate Helium
execution pipelines for (a) load/store, (b) integer, and (c) floating point / integer multi-
plication instructions, which are modelled as separate “execution units” in the SLOTHY
model. Third, the SWOG details the latencies of Helium instructions, which are reflected
in our SLOTHY model, including some latency exceptions because of forwarding paths.
Finally, we constrain the SLOTHY model for Cortex-M55 to forbid patterns of the
form VSTx; ?; VLDx, as those patterns do sometimes, depending on address alignment,
lead to memory bank conflicts, and thus pipeline stalls. Below, this phenomenon will
be referred to as a ST-LD-hazard (the interested reader should consult the SWOG for
detailed load/store-pipeline information explaining this).
Cortex-M85. We also experiment with a SLOTHY model for the Cortex-M85 CPU.
We focus on the microarchitectural aspects related to Helium only: Cortex-M85 brings
significant scalar improvements compared to Cortex-M55 because of larger dual-issuing
capabilities, but we leave their modelling and use for future work.
In terms of Helium, the Cortex-M85 microarchitecture is overall similar to Cortex-
M55, with a few noteworthy differences: First, similar to Cortex-M55, there are separate
pipelines for integer and floating-point addition/logical instructions, and for integer and
floating-point multiply instructions. Second, loads and stores can overlap (so that e.g.
VLDRx; VSTRx; VLDRx; ... can run stall-free), and only some specific sequences
such as {ARITH}; VLDx; VSTx; VLDx can lead to stalls — overall, scheduling of loads
and stores is more flexible. Third, the Cortex-M85 microarchitecture is designed to
be implementable at higher clock-rates than Cortex-M55, which increases some (cycle)
latencies compared to Cortex-M55: For example, de-interleaving loads VLD2x and floating-
point MACs have a latency of 4 cycles on Cortex-M85. This reinforces the importance of
good instruction scheduling, and also explains that, as we will see later (e.g. Section 7.3),
the best implementations for Cortex-M55 and for Cortex-M85 may be different.
6.3 AArch64+Neon
Cortex-A55. We derived the SLOTHY model for Cortex-A55 from experimentation, the
Cortex-A55 SWOG [Armi], and useful observations from [Len19]. Our goal was not to
define a fully precise reflection of the Cortex-A55 microarchitecture, but to focus on —
and model in sufficient detail — the aspects most relevant for our target workloads.
The Cortex-A55 is a superscalar CPU which can dual-issue many pairs of instruc-
tions including scalar and 64/128-bit Neon instructions, as well as pairs of 64-bit Neon
instructions. Notable exceptions are most pairs of 128-bit Neon instructions, and pairs of
multiply-accumulate scalar instructions. We express those characteristics in SLOTHY as
follows: First, we add two execution units for 64-bit vector operations, but mark 128-bit
vector instructions as occupying both. Second, we model two scalar execution units and
mark one as capable of multiple-accumulate instructions; this is a deviation from the
SWOG showing 3 scalar pipelines, but our model is sufficient for our purposes. Third, we
