DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 22/46

22 Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance assembly via constraint solving
model separate execution units for load/store operations. Finally, we incorporate issue-slot
restrictions, an important example being that most 128-bit Neon instructions are only
issued on slot 0. Latencies and throughputs are modelled as provided in the SWOG, with
occasional changes as suggested by our microbenchmarks. We also model the forwarding
paths for scalar and Neon multiply-accumulate sequences in SLOTHY, including their
additional constraints identified and highlighted in [Len19].
Cortex-A72. In contrast to the Cortex-M55, Cortex-M85 and Cortex-A55 microarchitec-
tures considered above, the Cortex-A72 is a triple-issue, out-of-order microarchitecture.
We refer to Section 4.10 for the general discussion of the uses SLOTHY can have in this
context. For Cortex-A72, our SLOTHY model captures a somewhat heuristic combination
of frontend and backend constraints, as we explain now.
The first important observation is that the Cortex-A72 has two Neon execution pipelines
in its out-of-order backend [Armj, Section 2.1], while the frontend can dispatch one micro-
operation per cycle to the respective issue queues [Armj, Section 4.1]. This implies that
Neon-heavy workloads, such as the Number Theoretic Transform (NTT), can achieve an
optimum of 2 Neon Instructions per Cycle (IPC) only if the in-order frontend also achieves
this throughput — a scheduling sensitive problem amenable to encoding in SLOTHY.
Concretely, code should be scheduled so that in every cycle, exactly two Neon instructions
are dispatched, one for each of the two Neon pipelines.
Motivated by the above, our SLOTHY-model of Cortex-A72 has as “execution units”
the dispatch slots in the Cortex-A72 in-order frontend (detailed in [Armj, Section 4.1]). In
this context, the notion of “latency” is not immediately meaningful, as an instruction’s
readiness for dispatch is independent of its readiness for execution. Similarly, dispatch
throughput is different from the execution throughput: 128-bit Neon integer multiplication
instructions dispatch at a rate of 1 IPC, even though execution happens with at most
1 /2 IPC on Cortex-A72. Despite this semantic discrepancy, we found that modelling the
frontend latency and throughput constraints in accordance with the backend constraints,
lead to good results. Intuitively, this is plausible, as a dispatch rate that’s consistently
higher than the backend’s execution rate would eventually overflow the issue queues.
6.4 Other (micro)architectures
M-Profile. Within the space of M-profile CPUs, the Cortex-M4 has received much
attention in the context of optimized PQC implementations [KPR+]. However, we do
not see it as particularly promising target for the use of SLOTHY, as the Cortex-M4
is a non-superscalar microarchitecture with the majority of the instructions completing
in a single cycle — scheduling of instruction is therefore largely irrelevant (with some
exceptions, such as loads and stores [Armc]). Similar remarks apply to most of the more
efficiency-focused M-profile CPUs. The Cortex-M7 CPU, in turn, could be an interesting
target for future work, as it offers a 6-stage superscalar pipeline with the support for
dual-issuing, as well as two ALUs with one supporting SIMD instructions [Armd]. Finally,
SLOTHY could be used as a vehicle to evaluate the performance impact of candidates for
Arm Custom Instruction (ACI).
A-Profile. Within the spectrum of A-profile CPUs, we did not cover the Cortex-X series
of performance-centric, highly out-of-order microarchitectures. Somewhat surprisingly,
we believe that those high-end processors will also be amenable to optimization through
SLOTHY for Neon-heavy workloads: Taking Cortex-X1 as an example, it can be seen
from [Arml] that there are 4 Neon pipelines in the backend, while the frontend also has
a maximum throughput of 4 Neon-IPC. We are therefore in the situation, outlined in
