DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 23/46

Abdulrahman, Becker, Kannwischer, Klein 23
Section 4.10, where the theoretically optimal throughput seems achievable only with careful
scheduling in consideration of the frontend’s dispatch constraints.
Finally, there are newergenerations of A-profile coresin theCortex-A5x and Cortex-A7x
lines one can consider, such as the Cortex-A510 processor and the Cortex-A78, Cortex-A710
and Cortex-A715 processors. We believe that SLOTHY will generally prove useful for the
Cortex-A5x in-order range — the Cortex-A510 CPU is particularly interesting because it
shares two Neon-units between two CPUs. Newer generations of Cortex-A7x cores, in turn,
seem likely to benefit less from SLOTHY for Neon workloads: While they have a backend
throughput of 2 Neon-IPC, many of them have a frontend that can achieve a maximum
of 4 Neon-IPC, and so we expect to observe less scheduling sensitivity. Where newer
generations of A-profile cores are explored, newer vector extensions such as SVE/SVE2
should be considered as well.
Otherarchitectures. WhilethisworkisfocusedontheArmM-andA-profilearchitectures,
the SLOTHY approach itself is architecture-agnostic and can be used to optimize for other
CPU or DSP/AI/ML accelerator (micro)architectures as well. Doing so, however, is beyond
the scope of this work, and left for further research.
7 SLOTHY as a development tool
Figure 6: High-level structure of slothy, our implementation of SLOTHY.
In this section, we describe our implementation and the intended usage of SLOTHY.
7.1 Overview
Goal. We aim for SLOTHY to enable an automated, non-interactive and auditable
optimization-step, operating on a clean and readable “base implementation” maintained
by the developer(s). In this vision, the developer’s responsibility and focus is to identify
algorithms for the target workload and to express those in terms of the target architecture,
without being impeded by microarchitectural performance concerns. The base implementa-
tion ought to be auditable and verifiable because of its clarity, while the SLOTHY-generated
optimizations ought to be auditable and eventually verifiable on the basis of information
emitted by SLOTHY, without trust in SLOTHY or its implementation.
We emphasize that “clean assembly” is not an oxymoron: For example, .req directives
allow for the use of symbolic register names, while .macro directives allow for the
encapsulation of common functionality. The examples discussed below will demonstrate
that those two constructs alone enable very readable assembly implementations.
