DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 24/46

24 Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance assembly via constraint solving
Dependence on microarchitecture. Sometimes, there are multiple approaches to express-
ing a workload in terms of the target architecture’s instruction set, with the best choice
depending on the target microarchitecture. We will see a few examples later. In those
instances, we expect developers to maintain multiple base implementations reflecting the
different approaches. Then, for a given microarchitecture target, slothy would be run on
all base implementations, and the most suitable optimization chosen for use.
Compiler-based approaches. Using SLOTHY frees the developer from per-workload
microarchitecture-specific optimizations. However, it remains a more laborious development
approach than compiler-based techniques such as intrinsics and or even auto-vectorization.
We primarily see SLOTHY as worthwhile in contexts where unlocking the last % of
performance is desirable, and/or where high workload complexity lowers the efficacy of
compilation-based techniques. Further, we believe that SLOTHY can be a useful tool for
the discovery of new optimization potentials, supporting compiler development.
7.2 Implementation
We implement the SLOTHY framework in Python, referred to as slothy in the following.
User interface. slothy can be called from Python or via the command line application
slothy-cli. Convenience wrappers are provided for automatic instantiation to our
various target architectures and microarchitectures.
Constraint solver interface. For the interface to the underlying constraint solver, a small
abstraction layer is introduced, facilitating the experimentation with different constraint
solvers. Currently, slothy is based on CP-SAT from Google OR-Tools.
Implementation structure. Figure 6 provides an overview over the different components
of slothy. The core implements the SLOTHY constraint modelling approach and provides
some heuristics expanding the reach of slothy to larger kernels. Other helper modules
provide configurability, functionality around computational flow graphs, and assembly
support functions (such as support for .req and .macro). Finally, as discussed, there are
multiple architecture and microarchitecture modules describing the target of optimizations.
Usage. Afterfixingatargetarchitectureandmicroarchitecture, theuserloadsanassembly
file, which can range from a small stub to a standalone assembly file with multiple functions,
macros, or similar — slothy does not attempt to make sense of it at this point. The user
then provides a configuration and issues one or more optimization commands, operating
on selected parts of the loaded file in-place. Finally, functions may be renamed to avoid
symbol clashes, and the optimized version of the code be stored to a file.
Optimizations are typically focused on a particular region, specified by assembly labels.
In case of a loop, the label at the start of the loop body is sufficient. slothy will
only attempt to parse the instruction in the selected regions. In particular, even when
standalone files are loaded, the underlying (micro)architecture models need only specify
the regions to be optimized, allowing example-driven expansion of the models.
Symbolic registers. slothy supports the use of assembly “templates” using symbolic
registers which have not been concretized using .req aliases. In this case, slothy takes
care of finding suitable instantiations. This further simplifies the provision of the “base”
implementation as it frees the developer from having to assign concrete architectural
registers to logical variables. In many cases, slothy can instantiate the template without
any reordering of instructions or renaming of registers which are already architectural —
