DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 31/46

Abdulrahman, Becker, Kannwischer, Klein 31
point addition and multiplication operations do not overlap as they run on the same
execution pipe. On Cortex-M85, they can overlap, but floating point multiply-accumulate
operations have a latency of 4 cycles. This reinforces the importance of precise scheduling,
and also suggests that the implementations on Cortex-M55 and Cortex-M85 may be
meaningfully different.
Base implementation. Listing 7 shows our clean base implementations for the floating-
point and the fixed-point FFT, using symbolic registers and assembler macros. We use
more temporaries than available architectural registers, and leave it to slothy to reorder
and rename instructions and registers to fit in the architectural register file.
Optimized implementations. To get a sense of the slothy-optimizations, Listing 8
shows the optimized fixed-point FFT for the Cortex-M55 CPU: In each iteration, seven
instructions are pulled deep into the previous iteration, enabling a stall-free loop body —
identifying such optimizations by hand would be very time-consuming. This version is
also stall-free on Cortex-M85 — in fact, running slothy for Cortex-M85 finds a stall-free
version with only one early instruction, owing to the simpler scheduling of load/stores.
Benchmarking environment. We benchmark all code using the MPS3 FPGA prototyping
board and the freely available AN552 and AN555 application nodes for Cortex-M55 and
Cortex-M85, respectively. Intrinsics have been compiled with Arm Compiler 6.19.
Results. Table 2 shows the performance of our slothy-optimized FFTs in comparison
with the reference implementations. We improve upon the state of the art in all cases,
achieving gains of 3%−10% compared to the prior microarchitecture-specific handwritten
assembly from [Arme], and of 13%−20% compared to the intrinsics versions from [Armh].
Given that the FFT is an exceptionally important and very well-studied workload for DSP,
we consider these improvements proof of the capabilities of slothy. Our code is readable
and the approach adaptable to other microarchitectures, similar to intrinsics-based code.
Impact. Our optimized FFTs have been communicated to Arm and merged into [Arme].
8.2 Example: NTT on Armv8.1-M+Helium
Wenowpresentourfirstcryptographicexamplefortheuseof SLOTHY:TheSLOTHY-based
optimizations for the Number Theoretic Transform (NTT) underlying Kyber and Dilithium,
targeting the Cortex-M55 and Cortex-M85 CPUs implementing Armv8.1-M+Helium.
8.2.1 Previous implementations
[BHK+21] explores how to map modular arithmetic in the NTT to the Arm architecture,
including Armv8.1-M+Helium. [BBMK+21, BHK+22] leverage those primitives for com-
plete implementations of 32-bit NTTs in Helium. These implementations keep the data in
vector registers but load constants in general purpose registers, allowing them to maintain
a good balance between the register files, and to merge two radix-2 layers at a time.
Coming up with the implementations from [BBMK+21, BHK+22] seems challenging
due to the complex interleaving necessary to achieve good overlapping. Loc.cit. achieves
this through loop unrolling and scripted register tracking. While the result is of very high
performance, it is difficult both to read and adapt, and has a large code-size.
In the following, we demonstrate how SLOTHY, instantiated for the Cortex-M55 and
Cortex-M85 CPUs, derives high performance Helium assembly implementations for the
NTT from readable base implementations. Beyond being considerably less effort and easier
to reproduce, the resulting code is also much smaller than that in the previous works.
