DOCUMENT: m55_slothy.pdf PAGE: 36/46

36 Fast and Clean: Auditable high-performance assembly via constraint solving
achieving much smaller code and better maintainability and readability. Compared to
the Cortex-M4 implementation from [AHKS22], we note speedups of 3.97×and 4.05×
for Cortex-M55 and Cortex-M85, respectively. Considering that the Dilithium NTT
is a 32-bit workload theoretically amenable to a 4×SIMD speedup from Helium, this
is close to optimal — and a remarkable demonstration of the power of Helium given
that the Cortex-M55 CPU does only have twice the memory and ALU resources as the
Cortex-M4. Finally, the performance on the Cortex-M85 CPU is slightly better yet very
close to the performance on the Cortex-M55 CPU, which is expected due to their similar
microarchitecture in terms of Helium (recall Section 6.2).
For the Kyber NTTs, we observe speedups of 6.36−6.58×compared to the Cortex-M4
implementation of [AHKS22] and of 4.75−4.92×compared to [HZZ+22], while maintaining
readability and code compactness. Those gains make sense considering that the Kyber
NTT is a 16-bit workload and thus amenable to 8×SIMD on Helium, and 2×SIMD on
Cortex-M4 when 32-bit SIMD instructions are used. Moreover, for [HZZ+22] the speedup
is smaller because the latter uses Plantard arithmetic which cannot be vectorized.
Overall, as shown in Table 3, we achieve IPCs very close to 1, despite most MVE
instructions having a throughput of 1 /2. The minor drop in the 1 + 2 + 2 + 2-split for the
Kyber NTT on Cortex-M55 is due to the share of loads and stores in the isolated first
layer — on Cortex-M85, a stall-free scheduling exists due to load/store overlap.
8.3 Example: NTT on AArch64
In this section, we discuss the optimization of the Kyber and Dilithium NTT on AArch64,
targeting the Arm Cortex-A55 and Cortex-A72 CPUs. Since this section is largely parallel
to Section 8.2, we are brief and focus only on the specifics of optimizing the NTT for
AArch64. We again refer to Section 3.4 for a brief introduction to the NTT.
State of the art. [BHK+21] describes the state-of-the-art implementations of the Kyber
and Dilithium NTTs for AArch64, putting emphasis on optimization for the Cortex-A72
CPU. We base our implementation on their arithmetic, but create our own readable base
implementation and experiment with numerous variations that we detail in the following.
Readable base implementation. As in Section 8.2, we experiment with different layer
merges for both NTTs. Due to the large vector register file of AArch64, up to four initial
layers can be merged without stack spills, suggesting layer splits of 4 + 3 or 3 + 4 for the
Kyber NTT, and of 4 + 4 or 3 + 5 for the Dilithium NTT. Between those, the 3 + 4 split
for Kyber and the 3 + 5 for Dilithium seem preferable since — slightly counterintuitively —
they lead to smaller code size (and thus optimization complexity): The last two layers
consist of intra-vector butterflies which do not require new data to be loaded and thus do
not increase the vector register pressure.
We also experiment with base implementations involving scalar instructions to perform
some loading/transposing/storing of data, the idea being to reserve the Neon units for
the core arithmetic and have the scalar operations run in parallel. While scheduling such
hybrid implementations by hand is very tedious and highly microarchitecture-specific, here
we only need to provide the sequential implementations, which is simple — we let SLOTHY
do the interleaving work, determining if/when the hybrid approach works.
As before, we heavily use register aliases and assembly macros to make the base
implementations clean and readable.
Optimized implementations. On Cortex-A55, the best implementation strategies for
both Kyber and Dilithium are the scalar/Neon hybrids offloading vector loads to scalar
instructions, but no other vector instructions. Alternatively or additionally offloading
