DOCUMENT: fp64_accuracy.pdf PAGE: 6/18

6 Hwang
and Technology as one of the to-be-standardized algorithms for post-quantum
cryptography.
Programmers write Jasmin programs with similar control of the computa-
tional flow as in assembly, and compile the programs into assembly programs
with the certified compiler jasminc. For verification purpose, we extract the
Jasmin programs to EasyCrypt according to the Jasmin model in EasyCrypt,
and verify the desired properties with EasyCrypt. Compared to CryptoLine,
verification in EasyCrypt requires much more effort by explicitly applying var-
ious lemmas instead of simply imposing properties in a declarative fashion in
CryptoLine, but one can argue more properties in Easycrypt, for example, the
indifferentiability of SHA3 from random oracle as shown in [Alm+19].
3 Incorrect Zeroization
3.1 The Problem of Floating-Point Multiplication
We point out an incorrect zeroization in the emulated floating-point multiplica-
tions in Falcon. We illustrate the issue in the C reference implementation, and
our finding also applies to the Armv7-M assembly optimized implementation.
We briefly review the C reference implementation of the emulated floating-
point multiplication in the submission package of Falcon as follows:
1. The inputs are two 64-bit integers with each representing a double-precision
floating-point number.
2. Extract the mantissas and add them with 252 as if the floating-point inputs
are non-zero.
3. Compute the product of mantissas with radix-25 arithmetic.
4. Normalize the product to a 55-bit value.
5. Compute the exponent field as the sum of input exponent fields with a
corrective subtraction.
6. Compute the sign field as the exclusive-or of the input sign fields.
7. Zeroize the product if any of the input exponent fields is zero.
8. Zeroize the product if the resulting exponent is too small.
9. Zeroize the exponent field if the product is zero.
10. Assemble the sign field, exponent field, and the upper 53 bits of the 55-bit
product.
11. Increment the resulting floating-point as an unsigned 64-bit integer if the
55-bit product should be rounded.
The issue is that the zeroization due to the smallness of the exponent field should
be the last operation since the increment from rounding may results in an expo-
nentfieldthatisslightlyabovethezeroizationthreshold.WerefertoAlgorithm4
for a more detailed illustration where the line in red(blue) corresponds to the
line in red(blue) of the above.
