DOCUMENT: fp64_accuracy.pdf PAGE: 10/18

10 Hwang
4.1 Modeling with CryptoLine Instructions
We first model our own strings of CryptoLine instructions and start annotating
CryptoLine programs with assertions and assumptions to transfer predicates
between backend tools. The main dificulties are as follows:
– When to declare statements that should be proved by the backend proof
systems?
– Which statements should be transferred between proof systems at a given
point?
We do not know of any systematic approaches resolving the two difficulties.
Nevertheless, we find the following constructions of intermediate symbols and
annotations sufficient for verifying the range:
1. Construct the 128-bit product r of mantissas with the long multiplication.
2. Split the input into radix-25 representation with bitfield arithmetic, verify
the correctness of the spliting with the SMT solver, and add the correspond-
ing algebraic identities to the computer algebra system.
3. Compute the multi-limb product, verify its algebraic correctness with r in
the computer algebra system, and add the corresponding boolean identities
to the SMT solver.
4. Verify the remaining operations (zeroization, rounding, assembling) entirely
with the SMT solver.
If we remove Steps 2. and 3., the SMT solver doesn’t return a result (it doesn’t
find an instance disproving the properties, but it doesn’t finish verifying over all
the possible inputs).
4.2 Range-Checking
We develop our own range arithmetic in C++ computing the pre- and post-
conditions to be verified. Once the pre- and post-conditions are computed for all
the possible floating-point additions/subtractions/multiplications, we verify the
correctness with CryptoLine. Typically, range-checking of floating-point arith-
metic focus on upper-bounding the floating-point errors3. However, we need to
derive non-trivial lower bounds of floating-point numbers for proving the non-
smallness of the absolute values of non-zero floating-point numbers.
For two non-negative floating-point numbers a.l ≤ a.u, we represent the
subset {0}∪[a.l, a.u]∪[−a.u,−a.l] as a structure with lower bound a.l and upper
bound a.u. Since the definition is symmetric for the positive and negative sides,
we only store the positive bounds, and update the positive bounds throughput
the entire computation. The zero values are included implicitly and we do not
3 For example, Frama-C [CKKPSY12] only shows that the floating-point number is
upper-bounded by a floating-point number and lower-bounded by 0, which is use-
less for proving the non-smallness of the absolute values of non-zero floating-point
numbers.
