DOCUMENT: fp64_accuracy.pdf PAGE: 11/18

Formal Verification of Emulated Floating-Point Arithmetic in Falcon 11
store its existence (it always exists in all the ranges). The range arithmetic of
floating-point multiplication is straightforward as shown in Algorithm 5. For
the floating-point addition/subtraction with the ranges a and b, we distinguish
between two cases:
1. Case a ∩b= {0}: The upper bound is computed as the sum of upper bounds,
and the lower bound is defined as the minimum of the absolute values of the
differences between an upper bound and a lower bound from different ranges.
In other words, the lower bound is defined as min (|a.u−b.l|, |b.u−a.l|).
2. Case a ∩b= t ̸= {0}: The upper bound is also computed as the sum of
upper bounds, and the lower bound is defined as the floating-point value
with mantissa 0 and exponent field 52 smaller than the exponent field of t.l,
since the smallest value occurs when subtracting two values with the real
value difference 2e−1075 where e is the smallest exponent field of the two
and choosing e as the exponent field of t.l results in a worse case analysis.
Since we have to shift the leading bit of mantissa to the 52-th bit possition,
the exponent field is subtracted by 52 and the mantissa becomes 252. By
the definition of floating-point numbers, the leading bit of mantissa is stored
implicity. This is why we set the mantissa to 0 in the floating-point number
representation.
Algorithm 6 is an illustration of the range arithmetic of floating-point addi-
tion/subtraction. After replacing all the floating-point arithmetic with the range
arithmetic in the FFT of Falcon, we transform all the input-output tuples into
pre- and post-conditions for the corresponding CryptoLine model. We then run
CryptoLine to verify the conditions. Our CryptoLine verification shows that
– All the range arithmetic are correct within our modeling of floating-point
addition, subtraction, and multiplication.
– All non-zero intermediate floating-point numbers have absolute values lie in
2−529
, 2−26(252 + 605182448294568)
when the input coefficients of FFT are integers in−215
, 215
.
Table 1 summarizes the verification time of the range conditions of floating-point
additions and multiplications in Falcon’s size-1024 complex FFT.
Algorithm 5: Range arithmetic of floating-point multiplication.
Inputs: a= (a.l,a.u) ,b= (b.l,b.u)
Output: c= (c.l,c.u)
1: c.l= a.l·b.l
2: c.u= a.u·b.u
3: return c
