DOCUMENT: m55_ntt-ftt_opt.pdf PAGE: 1/29

Polynomial multiplication on
embedded vector architectures
Hanno Becker1, Jose Maria Bermudo Mera2, Angshuman Karmakar2
,
Joseph Yiu1 and Ingrid Verbauwhede2
1 Arm Ltd, Cambridge, UK, {firstname.lastname}@arm.com
2 imec-COSIC, KU Leuven Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, Bus 2452, B-3001 Leuven-Heverlee,
Belgium {firstname.lastname}@esat.kuleuven.be
Abstract. High-degree, low-precision polynomial arithmetic is a fundamental compu-
tational primitive underlying structured lattice based cryptography. Its algorithmic
properties and suitability for implementation on diﬀerent compute platforms is an ac-
tiveareaofresearch, andthisarticlecontributestothislineofwork: Firstly, wepresent
memory-eﬃciency and performance improvements for the Toom-Cook/Karatsuba
polynomial multiplication strategy. Secondly, we provide implementations of those
improvements on Arm® Cortex®-M4 CPU, as well as the newer Cortex-M55 processor,
the first M-profile core implementing the M-profile Vector Extension (MVE), also
known as Arm® Helium™ technology. We also implement the Number Theoretic
Transform (NTT) on the Cortex-M55 processor. We show that despite being single-
issue, in-order and oﬀering only 8 vector registers compared to 32 on A-profile SIMD
architectures like Arm® Neon™ technology and the Scalable Vector Extension (SVE),
by careful register management and instruction scheduling, we can obtain a 3×to
5×performance improvement over already highly optimized implementations on
Cortex-M4, while maintaining a low area and energy profile necessary for use in
embedded market. Finally, as a real-world application we integrate our multiplication
techniques to post-quantum key-encapsulation mechanism Saber.
Keywords: Post-Quantum Cryptography· Polynomial multiplication· IoT·
Cortex-M55· Cortex-M4· M-profile Vector Extension (MVE)· Helium vector
extension· Number Theoretic Transform (NTT)· Toom-Cook· Karatsuba
1 Introduction
The rapidly expanding Internet of Things (IoT) has an unprecedented impact on our digital
ecosystem, so much that it is often termed the fourth industrial revolution. However, it
also poses significant challenges. Firstly (sadly, often rather lastly), security: Absence or
insuﬃcient quality of security measures on IoT devices is a frequent headline. Secondly,
performance: Embedded devices have much less compute resources than high-end consumer
devices such as mobile phones or desktops. The dichotomy of the situation is that tight
resource constraints need to be imposed on these devices to allow them to be cost-
eﬀective, but equally they limit performance and, importantly, often impede incorporating
secure cryptographic protocols. Both aspects are in fact closely tied because (public-
key) cryptography is computationally demanding. It is therefore a constant tussle of
cryptographers and embedded engineers alike to fit secure and most advanced cryptographic
protocols into constrained devices, and to have them perform suﬃciently well to enable
a wide range of applications. Unsurprisingly, an important criterion to assess a new
cryptographic protocol is to evaluate its suitability for constrained devices.
