DOCUMENT: m55_ntt-ftt_opt.pdf PAGE: 2/29

2 Polynomial multiplication on embedded vector architectures
The rise of Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) exacerbates the problem. Recalling the
context first: Large-scale quantum computers are a threat to our current digital security
infrastructure, especially public-key cryptography (PKC). The reason is that the security
of today’s predominant public-key cryptography – RSA and Elliptic Curve Cryptography
(ECC) – rests on the hardness of computational problems which are known [Sho97,PZ03]
to be solvable in polynomial time using a large quantum computer. Therefore, the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) started a standardization procedure [NISa]
aimed at the standardization of key-encapsulation mechanisms (KEM), public-key encryp-
tion (PKE) and signature schemes which resist the increased computational abilities of
quantum computers – those schemes form the field of Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC).
These schemes will eventually replace their counterparts RSA and ECC used in our current
public-key infrastructure. We refer to [NISb,Arm20] for more detailed introductions.
Post-Quantum Cryptography is highly relevant to the problem of balancing cost,
performance and security in the IoT since it tends to have a higher resource footprint
than classical public-key cryptography. It is thus vital to understand the demands and
performance of PQC on embedded devices. Reflecting this, the Cortex-M4 processor has
been designated by NIST as the reference platform for PQC on embedded systems.
ThemostprominentclassofPQCisthatofschemesbasedonstructuredlattices, andthe
underlying computational workload is the multiplication of polynomials of large degree and
low coeﬃcient precision. This problem has been studied extensively, and two approaches
prevailed: Multiplication via the Toom-Cook-Karatsuba algorithms [Too63,Coo66,KO62],
and multiplication via the Number Theoretic Transform (NTT). We are thus interested in
the constraints and performance of these algorithms on embedded systems. Structurally,
both approaches are very similar and amenable to the same tradeoﬀs [KMRV18,KRS19,
MKV20]. The main benefit of Toom-Cook is the absence of modular arithmetic, which
the NTT heavily relies on. Its main drawback, and the primary factor determining its
memory-usage, is that it expands the input both before (“evaluation”) and during (“point
multiplication”) the core of the multiplication routine, while the NTT operates in-place.
On high-end processors, performance improvements can often be obtained by leveraging
Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) instruction set extensions, such as Arm’s Neon
instruction set on the R- and A-profiles of the Arm architecture, or the Intel® Advanced
Vector Extension (AVX). On embedded systems, however, SIMD instruction extensions
are challenging within the usually tight power, cost and area constraints. The M-profile
Vector Extension (MVE), or Helium vector extension, is a rather recent addition to the
M-profile of the Arm architecture which promises to introduce the performance benefits of
vector extensions to embedded systems while maintaining a low gate and power profile.
The Cortex-M55 processor is the first implementation of the Helium instruction set. The
primary motivation of this work is to evaluate how this future generation of low-cost and
low-energy processors fare in the context of the next generation of public key cryptography.
Contributions We contribute to the study of viability and performance of PQC on
embedded devices. We study two themes: Firstly, how to reduce the resource demands
of PQC for low-end embedded devices such as the Cortex-M4 CPU. Secondly, how to
leverage the Helium instruction set on embedded devices implementing the Helium vector
extension, focusing on the Cortex-M55 processor. Our specific contributions are as follows:
• We revive a known but little used variant of Toom-Cook and Karatsuba called striding
Toom-Cook/Karatsuba to reduce the memory-usage of polynomial multiplication. In
a nutshell, while expansion during evaluation remains, a suitable input reordering
allows to avoid size-doubling on the point-multiplication, thereby saving almost 50%
in memory and also accelerating the interpolation step. See Table 1. We implement
the striding variant of Toom-Cook/Karatsuba on the Cortex-M4 processor.
