DOCUMENT: m55_ntt-ftt_opt.pdf PAGE: 7/29

Becker, Bermudo Mera, Karmakar, Yiu, Verbauwhede 7
3.1 A primer on vector architectures
Vector architectures promise to accelerate computation through the introduction of Single
Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) operations: They add a set of wide registers that are
viewed as vectors of equal-sized blocks called lanes, and provide instructions that operate
on those lanes in parallel. For example, a 128-bit vector register can be viewed as a length-8
vector of 16-bit elements, and a 16-bit vector add instruction (e.g. VADD.u16 in Helium,
see Figure 1) adds the lanes of two such vectors, storing the results in the lanes of a third
vector – thus the term “Single Instruction, Multiple Data”.
It is intuitively clear that vectorization holds great potential for accelerating computa-
tional workloads. However, the exact order of speedup is influenced by a large number
of architectural and microarchitectural parameters, which tend to also have implications
on both hardware cost and software constraints. Choosing a specific set of parameters is
therefore a careful tradeoﬀ tailored to the target domain. We provide some details in the
rest of this section to help the reader put the design choices of Helium and Cortex-M55
and their implications on hardware and software into perspective.
Architecturally, two parameters impacting the speedup potential of a SIMD architecture
are the expressiveness of its instruction set and the size of the vector registers: A SIMD
architecture with 256-bit vectors, such as provided by AVX2 or 256-bit implementations of
Arm’s Scalable Vector Extension (SVE), performs twice as many operations per instruction
compared to SIMD on 128-bit vectors, such as provided by Helium or Neon. Also,
specialized instructions for common operations or operation sequences (such as multiply-
accumulate) lower the number of instructions required to express a computation. It is
clear, however, that tailoring those parameters for performance comes at a significant cost
in hardware.
Another architectural parameter of interest is the number of architectural vector
registers, which constitutes a less obvious tradeoﬀ: To begin, fewer vector registers clearly
imply a lower hardware cost but larger constraints on software. However, the extent to
which those constraints imply a performance loss is less obvious, and very much depends
on the workload under consideration.
Microarchitecturally, primary parameters influencing the potential of vectorization are
the number of SIMD execution units, the latency and throughput of vector instructions,
and out-of-order execution capabilities. For example, the Cortex-X1 CPU has four Neon
execution units and therefore twice the vectorization throughput potential compared to a
Cortex-A78 CPU with two Neon execution units. Whether such potential can be realized,
however, heavily depends on the nature of the workload (e.g. data flow, instruction
distribution) and on the scheduling of instructions: In the case of high-end out-of-order
CPUs, the latter is mostly taken care of by the CPU itself – even to the extent that
multiple iterations of a loop can be executed in parallel to create enough independent
data streams to keep all SIMD units busy. Out-of-order execution also relaxes constraints
on software since instruction scheduling happens dynamically, but the downside of those
powerful microarchitectural features is a significant hardware cost. In-order execution, such
as found in all M-profile processors as well as low-end A-profile processors, considerably
improves cost and eﬃciency, but there it is the responsibility of the programmer/compiler
to keep the SIMD unit(s) busy through careful instruction scheduling.
To summarize: Within the design space of SIMD architectures and microarchitectures,
there are tradeoﬀs between hardware cost and performance potential, and hardware cost
and software constraints towards reaching this potential. Whether those constraints can
be met is a workload-specific problem. We will next describe the tradeoﬀs and constraints
in the case of the Helium vector architecture and the Cortex-M55 microarchitecture. In
Section 6, we will discuss how to solve the software constraints in the case of the PQC
workloads under consideration, thereby realizing the full performance potential of Helium
+ Cortex-M55 while maintaining a low gate and power profile.
