DOCUMENT: m55_ntt-ftt_opt.pdf PAGE: 8/29

8 Polynomial multiplication on embedded vector architectures
3.2 Introduction to MVE
The M-Profile Vector Extension (MVE) is a feature of the Armv8.1-M architecture [Armb,
Arme], primarily for signal processing and machine learning applications. MVE is also
referred to as the Helium vector extension, in alignment with the Arm® Neon™ Technology
architecture extension for A-profile processors [Arma, Section C.3.5]. However, while
there are similarities between the Helium instruction set and the Neon instruction set, the
Helium vector extension is a new ground-up architecture design specifically tailored for
the extreme area and energy eﬃciency required in typical Cortex-M applications.
The vector file Like the Neon instruction set, the Helium vector extension uses 128-bit
vector registers. There are 8 vector registers, compared to 32 in the Neon instruction
set, a design choice which can be approached from multiple angles: Firstly, it results in
a lower gate count and power profile. Secondly, the lower vector count is compensated
for by multiple features, including the presence of numerous instructions utilizing both
vector and scalar registers. The suitability of scalar-vector operations is a main diﬀerence
between M- and A-profile: On A-profile implementations, the physical distance between
vector and scalar register file is too large to allow for low-latency scalar-vector operations.
The smaller scale of M-profile CPUs means that these operations become feasible.
Implication: Algorithm design A common technique for vectorization of computational
workloads is batching, whereby multiple instances of a higher-level construct are computed
in parallel, rather than the computation of a single instance of the construction being
vectorized and accelerated.
Since batching tends to use a large number of vector registers but a low number
of general purpose registers (GPR), we found it not suitable for use with the Helium
vector extension except for very small computations. Instead, we found that the Helium
instruction set works well for single-instance speedup, using a mix of vector and GPR file.
We will see this in the example of schoolbook multiplications below.
cycles
0 1 2 3 4
VLDR
VMLA
VLDR
VMLA
beats
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Figure 2 Instruction overlapping on a dual-beat implementation of Helium
Instruction Overlapping The idea of overlapping the execution of instructions is funda-
mental to CPU microarchitecture and at the heart of the concept of a pipeline. However,
it is commonly hidden from the programmers. The Helium architecture extension deviates
from this by making instruction overlapping part of the architecture.
The execution of each vector instruction is architecturally subdivided into four 32-bit
parts called beats. The operation of each beat may aﬀect multiple lanes: For example,
the VADD.u16 operation operates on two 16-bit lanes per beat. The Helium architecture
extension requires that each beat of an instruction is executed in-order, but it allows
implementations to execute beats from the following instruction whilst still executing beats
from the previous instruction [Armb]. For example, a vector load VLDR instruction can be
overlapped with a vector multiply accumulate VMLA as shown in Figure 2.
