DOCUMENT: m55_ntt-ftt_opt.pdf PAGE: 12/29

12 Polynomial multiplication on embedded vector architectures
The polynomials used in Saber are generated from packed data on a per-coeﬃcients
level. We expect that it possible to merge the upfront permutation of the input into the
key generation process with small negligible penalty, thereby reducing the evaluation step
to classical Toom-Cook/Karatsuba, but leave exploring the details for future work.
5 Implementation: Cortex-M4
In this section, we describe the implementation aspects of the striding version of Toom-Cook
and Karatsuba on Cortex-M4 processors.
5.1 Toom-Cook/Karatsuba
As explained in Section 4, there are two fundamental diﬀerences between the classical and
the striding variants of Toom-Cook multiplication: The access pattern to the coeﬃcients
of the operands and the memory expansion of the products. The sequence of arithmetic
operations performed during evaluation and interpolation is the same for both variants.
The read accesses occur during the evaluation and are performed with oﬀset 64 for
the classical Toom-Cook whereas 4 consecutive coeﬃcients at a time are required for the
striding version. Although the access pattern of the striding variant is more regular, this
is an issue for exploiting the DSP extensions to carry out two operations on halfword
registers in parallel. To circumvent this problem, the polynomials can be stored with a
custom memory layout, in which case the complexity is moved to the packing operation,
or the coeﬃcients of the polynomial can be packed with an oﬀset of 4 after being loaded
into the register. Since we implement the entire multiplication we opt for the latter.
The instruction overhead is equal to the number of word loads, eﬀectively as if we only
performed halfword loads.
The write operations happen during interpolation, when the result is computed from
the weighted polynomials. Here, the striding version has an advantage since it iterates half
the times of the classical due to the non expansion of the products. Additionally, since the
coeﬃcients of the result are generated consecutively, the write operations can be simplified
to 4 per iteration instead of 7. In addition to this simplification of the interpolation, the
non expansion of the products in the striding version allows for a halving in the memory
requirements to store all the weighted polynomials, i.e., a saving of 896 bytes.
The diﬀerences in the implementation of the striding version of Karatsuba with respect
to the classical Karatsuba are equivalent to Toom-Cook. There is an overhead in the
instruction count due to the sequential access pattern to the coeﬃcients of the polynomial
during evaluation, and the counterpart during interpolation if one wants to exploit the
single instruction multiple data capabilities of Cortex-M4 processors. However, the non
expansion of the polynomial degree after the multiplication is more beneficial than in
the case of Toom-Cook. In particular, if Karatsuba is applied recursively the memory
utilization can be kept constant by re-utilizing the memory allocated to store the operands
after the evaluation is performed.
5.2 Schoolbook multiplication
It has been shown in [KMRV18,KRS19] that schoolbook multiplication has the highest
impact in the performance of polynomial multiplication. We follow the divide and conquer
approach of [KRS19] to decompose the schoolbook multiplication into smaller multiplica-
tions that can be performed without fetching extra coeﬃcients from memory and aiming to
use the multiply and accumulate instructions. Moreover, to avoid length doubling, we need
to perform a negacyclic convolution in-place. This is a challenge because the DSP exten-
sions of Cortex-M4 processors oﬀer a wide range of multiply and accumulate instructions
