DOCUMENT: m55_ntt-ftt_opt.pdf PAGE: 13/29

Becker, Bermudo Mera, Karmakar, Yiu, Verbauwhede 13
but not their multiply and subtract counterparts. Additionally, extra load instructions are
required due to the negatively wrapped accumulation which further increases the register
pressure, which is key to performance [KMRV18,KRS19]. To circumvent this issue, we
create a custom memory layout where both operands are in consecutive addresses and,
therefore, only one pointer needs to be kept in a register while coeﬃcients of diﬀerent
operands can be loaded using immediate oﬀsets.
The other implementation decision for the polynomial multiplication is the cut-oﬀ
degree from which Karatsuba is not applied anymore and the multiplication is performed
using the schoolbook algorithm. Due to the availability of registers to pre-load coeﬃcients
and the absence of multiply and subtract instructions, we find that the optimal cut-oﬀ
is degree 16. For higher cut-oﬀs, the performance will be determined by the dominant
term between the extra load operations required in the striding version of Karatsuba and
the overhead introduced by the negacyclic convolution during schoolbook multiplication.
We have verified that the optimal cut-oﬀ is degree 16, with 34,884 clock cycles for a 256
coeﬃcient polynomial multiplication, while for degree 32 the execution time increases to
36,340 clock cycles. This choice was expected since 16 was also the optimal cut-oﬀ for
other multiplications combining Toom-Cook and Karatsuba [KMRV18,KRS19].
In Section 7 we discuss the performance and memory figures of our proposed multipli-
cation and compare the impact on the full Saber operation to other implementations in
Cortex-M4 processors as well as in the new Cortex-M55 processor.
6 Implementation: Cortex-M55
In this section, we describe our implementations of large-degree, low-precision polynomial
multiplication on the Cortex-M55 CPU, leveraging the Helium vector extension.
6.1 NTT vs. Toom-Cook/Karatsuba on vector architectures
[CHK+21] demonstrates that for Cortex-M4, polynomial multiplication via NTTs can
outperform multiplication via Toom-Cook even for coeﬃcient rings not tailored to the
NTT, such as Z213 . For vectorized implementations, however, the passage to the NTT
comes at a larger cost than for non-vectorized implementations. We provide some details.
Setting expectations Since the Helium vector extension operates on 128-bit vectors and
the Cortex-M55 CPU is single-issue for vector instructions, we consider a 4×speedup a
theoretical limit for a vectorized 32-bit NTT. However, we do not expect to meet this limit,
because the NTT relies on long multiplications for modular arithmetic, and few Helium
instructions can perform more than two 32 ×32 →64 long multiplications. For Toom-
Cook/Karatsuba based multiplication, we operate on 16-bit lanes, hence get a theoretical
speedup of 8×over scalar code. However, optimized implementations on the Cortex-M4
CPU already leverage the DSP extension to treat 32-bit registers as 2 ×16-bit vectors and
thusoperateontwo16-bitvaluesat once. We thusexpectaspeedupsomewherebetween4×
and 8×. Considering that NTT-based polynomial and matrix-vector multiplication for the
Saber rings is around 2×as fast as Toom-Cook/Karatsuba based routines [CHK+21, Table
5], it is not clear which approach will be faster when implemented using Helium.
6.2 Vectorizing striding Toom-Cook/Karatsuba
Recall that 4-way Toom-Cook evaluation is a matrix-vector multiplication
R7×4 ×R4×(n/4) −→R7×(n/4), R= Z216 ,
