DOCUMENT: m55_ntt-ftt_opt.pdf PAGE: 19/29

Becker, Bermudo Mera, Karmakar, Yiu, Verbauwhede 19
abis [a0,a1,a2,a3]·[b2,b1,ζb3,ζb2]. Like UMLAL, VMLALDAV.s32 accumulates into a pair of
GPRs. We compute all coeﬃcients of abin pairs of GPRs each, before moving them into a
vector using VMOV Qx[i], Qx[j], Ra, Rb and applying a single Montgomery reduction.
The approach has some drawbacks: Firstly, we need four loads for b; a batched imple-
mentation would require only one. This can be amortized by simultaneously computing
multiple aib; we have not yet implemented this approach, yet. Secondly, the cost of prepar-
ing b3,b2,b1,b0,ζb3,ζb2,ζb1. Following an approach similar to [BHK+] and adapted to this
context, this can be partly amortized in the application to matrix-vector multiplication
by precomputing b3,b2,b1,b0,ζb3,ζb2,ζb1 as part of the forward NTT. In Section 7 below,
this size-doubling version of the NTT is called “expanded NTT”. We find that the above
schoolbook multiplication strategy oﬀers a good mix of diﬀerent kinds of operations which
can be interleaved to leverage instruction overlapping.
6.4.5 Inverse NTT
We use Gentleman-Sande butterflies (a,b) →(a+ b,ζ(a−b)), which we compute using
interleaved add/sub sequences and the 3-instruction Montgomery multiplication as in the
forward-NTT. Overflow is prevented through the addition of selected Barrett reductions.
The GS butterflies are inverse to the CT butterflies only up to a factor of 2, which we
need to compensate through a modular division in/after the inverse NTT. We also need to
account for the Montgomery twist by 2−31 ∈Fq in the point multiplication. We merge half
of the required scalings with the multiplications in the last-layer GS butterflies. For the
other half, we add explicit Montgomery multiplications. One could integrate the scalings
into the GS butterflies for all but the first coeﬃcient with a trick similar to Proposition 1;
however, we would need explicit Barrett reductions at the end of the last layer in this case,
which would only be one instruction shorter than the Montgomery multiplications.
6.5 Side-Channel resistance
All of our code is resistant against timing side-channels on Cortex-M4 and Cortex-M55:
The control-flow is secret-independent, and all instructions we used have data-independent
timing, including predication. We do not attempt resistance against other side-channels.
6.6 Hashing
We have not attempted to develop hashing implementations based on the Helium vector
extension: Both the smaller scale nature of Cortex-M CPUs and the fact that software
executes directly in the physical address space (without virtual to physical translation)
mean that the overhead associated with oﬄoading computation to accelerators is very low.
As a result, many Cortex-M microcontrollers already include accelerators for symmetric
cryptography and hashing. It is expected that these accelerators will be used for the hashing
in PQC schemes, eliminating the need for high performance software-based hashing.
“90’s versions” Numerous PQC schemes oﬀer a “90’s version” replacing the use of SHA-3
by AES and SHA-2, and it has been discussed whether NIST should standardize those
versions. We support NIST standarizing “90’s versions”: Firstly, many existing MCUs
already have hardware acceleration for AES and SHA-2. Secondly, AES and SHA-2 will not
go away anytime soon, and limited gate budget may prevent vendors from shipping MCUs
with both SHA-2 and SHA-3 acceleration. Finally, SHA-2 is a faster software-fallback for
systems which do not have have any hardware acceleration for hashing.
